# Written Assignment 3 Sample Answers

The third written assignment is the final project for the Gamification course. To help you develop good answers, we have selected three samples from the Fall 2012 session, reproduced here with the permission of the authors. We apologize for any formatting errors in converting the answers for posting.The assignment gives you a specific format to follow (the six-step design framework in the lectures), but it gives you the freedom to propose your own gamified solution. The examples below were selected from among many excellent submissions in the prior session. They are intended as general guidance, not specific templates. As always, look at the grading rubric for guidance on how your answer will be scored. Please keep in mind that the topic was different in 2012, and the gamified approaches that made sense for an ebook publisher will not necessarily work for a collaborative consumption platform.Do not copy these answers. We remind you that the Course Policy on Plagiarism & Cheating requires you to submit your own original work. If you receive a submission for peer assessment this is primarily or entirely copied from these examples, give it a score of zero and flag it as plagiarism.The Fall 2012 AssignmentAs you will see, the assignment used the same basic structure, but gave a different scenario.Now that you know the essential concepts about gamification and game design, it's time to use them. For this final task, we ask you to bridge this gap as you meld creativity and structure to match peoples' needs with technical feasibility and business realities.You are approached by Cheyenne Kendrick, the CEO of Go Digital Press (GDP), a global publisher of electronic books for devices such as the Kindle, Nook, and iPad. She knows you are one of the top experts on gamification, which she has heard can revolutionize publishing. She asks you to present a proposal for a gamified system to take her business to the next level.GDP concentrates on the trade segment of the book market, i.e. non-fiction publications that would traditionally appear in bookstores, rather than mass-market paperbacks. Approximately 50% of its titles are targeted at business professionals; 25% are educational resources on technical topics such as computer programming; and the remainder address a variety of different subjects.As a pioneer in e-book publishing, GDP faces the challenge that many users, even in the U.S., do not yet own reader devices. As of April 2012, only 21% of American adults reported that they had read an e-book in the past year, although those numbers are increasing rapidly. Kendrick tells you that another concern is that the device manufacturers and their associated distribution platforms control the sales process, making it difficult for publishers such as GDP to obtain data or develop direct customer relationships. On the positive side, an e-book is a flexible digital asset, which can offer interactive features beyond any physical book. Kendrick asks you to propose a way to gamify the distribution or consumption of e-books, or both.Format: Maximum of 1500 words. A normal answer will have descriptive text, and/or a set of bullet points, for each of the six sections of the design framework.SAMPLE RESPONSE 1: Naemi LucknerDisclaimer: Source: Pew Research Center (http://libraries.pewinternet.org/2012/04/04/the-rise-of-e-reading/, http://pewinternet.org/Reports/2011/E-readers-and-tablets/Report/Demographics.aspx) the American market will be the reference market for this assignment.1) Define business objectivesGo Digital Press (GDP) stated the following as problems:Potential users do not own e-readers yet (only about 21% of adults)Manufacturers and associated distribution platforms control the salesIt is difficult for GDP to obtain data and develop customer relationshipsGDP is interested in gamification of the distribution or consumption of e-books.Gamification has potential to lead to:Behavior change: This could be used to get people in the habit of reading e-books.Enhance experiences: E-books can offer interactive feature that physical books cannot offer.Sense of community: Reading tends to be experienced alone. Gamification could create a sense of community in the readers, which could have motivating effects to read/get more books.Sense of progression: Books are usually read one by one. When reading e-books the sense of progression through the book can get lost. The user doesn't feel the weight of the book and doesn't see the pages go by, apart of a progression bar usually build into the interface of an e-reader. Gamification can help show progression not only through the book but through the users library.Making users feel good about themselves: Gamification might be a means to pass a feeling of doing something meaningful on to reading an e-book.Fun: Here could be an access point that other e-book publishers have not thought of yet.2) Delineate target behaviorsRead more: Users are provided with an overview of their reading activity. Quests, challanges and more could be used to motivate people to change their behavior in the desired way. Users could also design their own challanges. They could for example wish to read more and hence challange themselves to read at least 20 pages a day for a month. GDPs system can track the data, send out reminders and provide the possibility to share challanges with friends/colleagues.Build a relationship: GDP offers books for a niche market. The users are mostly professionals, educators and students and will be described in more detail in the following section. To build a relationship to the users GDP needs to find out their needs and react to them. Students, for example, tend to need a lot of books and have a tight budget, so GDP could offer an "a-book-a-month-subscription". This would mean users would get a cheap book a month and return to the GDP homepage on a regular basis which provides the opportunity to build a relationship with them. A book a month could also mean, they'd have too many books for a semester. This could be used for the following target behavior.Share more: Readers could invite friends/colleagues and add them to their circle. Information, quests, challanges and more can be shared with everyone in the circle. GDP can derive use from getting people to want a bigger circle, hence inviting more people to join their network. It could for example be possible to share books with other people in ones circle. That way users could get access to more books as they paid and would have an incentive to invite more associates. When having a subscription as mentioned above, users could get an award if they give one of their books away to a friend who is not yet a member of GDPs network. This could broaden the userbase and users would feel good about themselves for giving a book to a friend.Buy more: GDP needs people to spend money on their product. The above mentioned target behaviors are meant to get users to stay on GDPs site and buy their books there.Metrics that could be used are pages/books read (daily/weekly/mothly), time spend using the device, DAU/MAU, volume of activity (books given as presents, books received for completing quests,...), virality (new friends invited to participate).3) Describe your playersThe target audience are prospective customers of GDP. GDP concentrates on the trade segment of the book market, making the target audience business professionals, educators and students as well as people interested in books of special topics.Demographics ages:18-49 gender: both education: collage, collage graduate income: medium ($50000-$74999), high ($75000+ per year) family life: with childrenPsychographics The target group has access to the internet and likes easy access to a wide selection of books that they can get quickly. The avarage e-book reader reads about 24 books per year. GDPs target audience is interested in educating themselves for professional, educational or interest reasons. They like using their device to read in bed or while traveling. 81% get their book recommendations from family members, friends and co-workers, 56% from online bookstores and websites, 51% from staffers in bookstores, libraries and library websites. Cooperative system could an effective gamification for this demographic.4) Devise activity loopsThe system uses predefined quests and challanges to keep users interested. The first couple of quests are designed to be a tutorial showing the user how to use the system (onboarding). The user is always presented with three possible quests and their progress on their home screen (scaffolding).If users complete a predefined number of quests of a certain type s/he gets a new role in the system. Reading 5 books on the topic of gamification for example, makes you an "expert" on the topic. You are asked to provide reading lists for others interested in the topic. When answering a question in a gamification forum, your answer is shown in a different color to let others know you are an expert. If you agree to receive direct questions of other users you are notified of new questions coming in by email. Answering forum and direct questions might also be part of other quests and help you to level up. Your role might change from "expert" to "teacher" of gamification (mastery).As soon as users finished the tutorial quests they can start defining their own challenges, which can be personal, open to friends/colleagues or to the whole community.New users are drawn into engagement loops by providing motivating small tasks and giving feedback when they are completed. They don't have to read through a manual but are given hints in the quest description to find out how to use the system. Advanced users are awarded with new roles in the system that allow them to use different parts of it, like defining their own challenges. Expert users could get fun out of helping others or broadening their role spectrum.5) Don’t forget the fun!Fun can derive from various activities. The following incomplete list mentions a few tasks the system envelops, that can be seen as elements of fun.Quests: Users are provided with predefined quests. The quests have different degrees of difficulty depending on how advanced the users are. Users can also create their own quests.Sharing: Users can share their accomplishments with their associates. It was found, that real books are shared more often than e-books. The system provides the possibility to share books with friends or give away as presents.Exploring: There are different areas ranching from the store to a forum and a "home". Users don't have to use all areas, but can look around and get to know the system.Problem solving: Some quests might be posed in riddles, others want the user to find some information, having them research the internet or read other books on the subject.Chilling: Reading can be informative but also just done for pleasure.Teamwork: Some challenges ask for teamwork to be completed. Books can be shared and help with group assignments in real live.Collecting: Users can collect roles in the system, adding new features.6) Deploy the appropriate toolsThe system is largely explained in the previous sections. It is presented as part of the website of GDP and can be used on devices with an internet connection. Each user has a "home" showing their progress. New quests are suggested as soon as the previous quest is finished.The progression is visually shown as a "bubble of knowledge". This metaphor is chosen to appeal to the described target group. When a user reaches a new role rewards can be received.Users see a representation of their friends with everyone's last completed quest. They can send messages and challenges to everyone on their list. They can get additional information about the topics they are interested in and contact experts.Users are encouraged to keep using GDPs services. They get rewarded for sharing books and information and might be motivated enough to keep buying their books at GDP. GDP can build relationships with their userbase providing them with information about special offers and awarding their loyalty.SAMPLE RESPONSE 2: Sandeep NarangDesign Document of the proposal for a gamified system that would take Go Digital Press (GDP) to the next level in the distribution and sale of e-books:1) Define business objectivesDevelop a direct relationship with customers by overcoming the challenge posed by reader device manufacturers and their associate distribution platforms, which presently control the sale of e-books in the market. The proposed gamified system would strengthen this distribution platform by promoting and popularizing the consumption of e-books amongst GDP’s target audience by way of social networking and influence marketing. This in turn would bolster the sale of various e-book reading devices such as the Kindle, Nook, and iPad. In simple terms this system would bring about a win-win situation for all concerned: GDP would have a better say in e-book distribution process and reap benefits of increased e-book sales whereas reader device manufactures would benefit from increased sale of their respective readers. Benefits to readers would be in the form of easily available and affordable e-books and reasonably priced reading devices.Create an immersive, engaging, rich, and a fun filled platform for the target audience (players) that promotes habitual reading; helps them to gain information (increase competency) and collaborate with other players (social networking) registered with the system; gives them freedom to make choices (autonomy); and above all motivates them intrinsically so that they return to the system time and again (relatedness).2) Delineate target behaviorsThe gamified system expects the players to do the following things:Log into the system as frequently as possible which in itself would be a point earning task and measured by the system. An increase in daily and monthly logins would be one of the metrics that would be used for measuring the increase or decrease in the popularity of the system. The unique number of visitors to the system each month and the average time users spend would be other important means of measuring the success rate of the system.Spend a lot of time interacting with the system to achieve personal and group based objectives and discover new things and earn surprising rewards. This would make the system engaging and promote the habit of e-book reading amongst players and popularize reading devices. Since the gamified system would allow players to purchase and download e-books from the GDP portal, the monthly sales of e-books would be a great matrix that would point out whether the gamified system is helping to sell more books or not.Existing players can redeem game points in the real world in the form of cash coupons/rebates/gift cards that can be used for purchasing e-book readers or gifting them to others and that too at nominal prices. This would automatically bolster the distribution of e-books and e-book readers and the monthly sale of these devices would serve as a matrix for the system's overall success.3) Describe your playersThe system would attract a large swath of players from all walks of the society, ranging from business professionals, software engineers, university students, teacher community, researchers, to housewives, and young adults. The system would generally attract people who love to read books for any reason (career enhancement, hobby, research work, leisure activity, etc.). It would also appeal to people who are well versed with modern day technology (use of Internet, e-book readers, etc.) and digital gaming. Specifically, a vast majority of the system users would be existing and prospective consumers of GDP.Player demographics: Age Range: 18-55 years Gender: 55% Male and 45% FemaleTechnology Users: people having Net connection, smart phones, e-book readers, gaming consoles, etc.Occupation: business professionals, high school and university students, and almost anyone who loves readingFamily Income (annual): $36000 onwardsPlayer psychographics: Players would be classified as per Amy Jo Kim’s player type framework. Here is a description of player in respect to different game mechanics:Competitors: These players would crave for rewards (points), flaunt/show off their status (as levels), and achievements (badges they have earned for successfully overcoming specific challenges). They would interact with the system with the aim of winning competitions. In a nutshell these players would be on the constant lookout for thrilling and competitive action.Collaborators: These players would form the life blood of this gamified system. They would help others, give gifts or points, participate in group activities, and motivate others so that the entire gaming experience brings a win-win situation for everyone involved.Explorers: Along with competitors, explorers would also for a major chunk of game players in this particular system. Their primary role would be to intensively interact with the system content (collect badges, vote for/rate/review comments on discussion forums, and even curate other’s content).Articulators: These players would love to put across their feelings by customizing things (their avatar) and build or create items for others to use in the game environment (challenging reading lists). These players would primarily be interested in redeeming game points to get cash coupons/rebates/gift cards they can use for purchasing e-books directly from the game system and also for purchasing additional e-book readers.4) Devise activity loopsThis would be the feedback offered by the system to its players:Points: for completing different types of tasks (engagement loops) such as logging into the system, reading a book from a reading list, completing all the books in a reading list, accomplish a challenge, creating a reading list to challenge others, etc.Levels: the players would progress through the system by accumulating points (progression loop). The system will primarily comprise of these three levels: Novice Reader, Regular Reader, and Expert Reader. At each level a player would have to read books specified in numerous reading lists that they create for themselves by choosing/buying, e-books from the GDP portal or by accepting lists as a challenge from the system/others.Counters/Tickers: the system would also have a feedback mechanism as visual tickers on the main interface displaying the cumulative goals achieved by all the players on a daily basis. The community ticker would display the total number of people who have registered with the system. Other tickers would show number of challenges completed by individual players, their total points, books they have read, books they downloaded from the GDP portal, points they require for obtaining a cash coupon etc.5) Fun ElementThis would provide intrinsic motivation for players to stay on in the system and remain engaged in various progressive loops at different levels:Interesting activities: completion of simple, complex, and challenging reading lists and accepting challenging reading lists from the system/others. Doing tasks that involve completion contingency (timed activities). There would be surprising challenges, rewards, and even offers to get free e-books from time to time.Unlimited content: players would get to unlock new content in the form of exciting reading worlds they can enter – Tech World, Art World, Business World, Recipe World etc. Here players can test their individual reading habits by finding challenging reading lists, creating tough reading assignments for self/others, and take on lists posted by others. Each reading world would comprise of innumerable reading tracks that would constantly branch out and change.Customization: Players can select avatars and customize them according to the reading world they are in.Trading: points would also be traded to get concession for buying e-books from GDP and for purchasing reading devices (extrinsic motivation).Special powers: players get special power-ups such as ability to start discussions, comment and curate forum posts made by others, provide advice, create reading world specific reading lists, and motivate others to excel.Social engagement: collaboration between players is fun and would occur when players decide to tackle challenges (e.g. unlock new game content, accept a new reading track, etc.) from their friends and even complete their reading list as a group activity. Players can also gift points to help other players.Discussion forum: where players can seek opinion from experienced and expert players, express their feelings, describe books they have read, and provide positive critique.Best voted lists: Players can create lists and put them up for voting where the best voted lists would make it to the leaderboard on the system interface.User interface: a simple and easy to use interface that is easy to navigate and attracts players to it all the time.6) Deployment ToolsThe deployment tools for this particular gamified system are:A cloud based application that is only accessible on specific e-book readers and supports big data (billions of data points).The system allows players to download/buy e-books from the GDP portal on their respective reading devices using a specialized wi-fi technology. Once downloaded the system tracks these books.An intelligent that system interprets player data and based on this information offers a lot of doable choices and options (based on the sandbox concept) to players (creation of customized lists, avatars, etc.) making the entire experience enriching, meaningful, and fun filled.The application would be user friendly, accessible, and have strong scaffolding elements to quickly take players into its fold.Feedback mechanism would include points (including special points that can be redeemed in the real world to buy e-books and device readers), levels, challenges, leaderboards, etc.Note: Since it’s not possible to read all the e-books published by GDP the game will act as a sandbox where people can enter the system and constantly explore the system and go on reading.SAMPLE RESPONSE 3: Lyndon WalkerThe following is a proposal for a gamified framework for Go Digital Press (GDP). It is presented in six sections, representing a gamification design framework.1) Define business objectivesThe main objective of the gamification will be to increase the sales of ebooks produced by GDP. A secondary objective which ties in to the first objective is to motivate people to change their reading behaviours so that they are using ebook readers (which will in turn feedback to the main object of increasing the sale of ebooks). The final objective of the gamification will be to accumulate market research information about readers, since the scenario states that this is not currently done.2) Delineate target behaviorsThe key behaviours of the players are to read more ebooks (and therefore purchase more ebooks), and to interact with GDP in a way that provides more market research relevant customer information. To do this we will have a gamified system that combines information collection and interaction at two points; the distribution of the ebooks (ie the point of sale), and the consumption of the ebooks. Some of this proposal will depend on the technological constraints of the ebook system. For example, an Apple ibook can have embedded video and quizzes but this is not the case for all ebooks. Where possible, I would recommend having the gamified system embedded in the books themselves rather than being separate system. However, if this is not possible, having the books link to an external app or website will still enable the company to provide game elements within the ebook experience. At the point of distribution or sale, the company could link the new customers to their website. Rather than just collecting market research information by a webform (which tends to be skipped by lots of customers), they could provide a LinkedIn style social media site that allows buyers of business and educational books to not only enter their details but also interact with other customers who are interested in similar books. It is also important for collected metrics to provide feedback to the players, letting them know when they are successfully engaging in the intended behaviors. A progress bar on an ebook (or additional quiz/technical material) will help readers keep track of how they are progressing (if they have purchased an education or business book they are likely to be interested in this and it will help their motivation).3) Describe your playersThe participants of interest are current readers of GDP books and potential customers who could purchase GDP books. In particular we are interested in readers of non-fiction business and education titles as this comprises at least 75% of GDP sales. How can we use this information to inform a gamification design? While we don't have sufficient information about our customers and potential customers to use a framework like Bartle's player types, it does seem reasonable to assume that a cooperative system will work better for readers of educational books. We could argue that readers of business books may prefer a competitive setting, but this may depend on what kind of book we are talking about. A system that recognises achievement and completion (such as progress bars during the reading of books, badges of completion) will motivate reading.4) Devise activity loopsThe intention of the consumption part of the system is for GDP to develop a business and learning community, where participants interact via a social media system, and help each other to learn more about their technical areas of interest (and in the process, consume more ebooks). Being able to interact with other readers and discuss business topics and technical content will encourage them back to the website. Another game element that could be added to this is to provide users with points for interacting (especially helping other users in the same way that site like Experts-Exchange operate).5) Don’t forget the fun!Purchasers of educational books are trying to learn about a topic. To learn technical topics and skills, this relies on "doing" rather than just reading about how to. This provides a lot of scope for games and activities relating to the topic of the book. For example, a book on programming can provide links to individual and team programming tasks. These readers are more likely to be intrinsically motivated, so this providing feedback on learning progress and success will help to keep them on track more than any kind of extrinsic reward. Minor "rewards" such as unlocking additional content, videos etc, could also be added to the system.6) Deploy the appropriate toolsSo far this report has mentioned gamification with regards to the different components of the framework. In this section I will summarise the system. Two components, one at point of distribution/sale and one as part of consuming (reading) the ebooks. Technical constraints will determine whether these parts are incorporated into the ebook files/reader or a stand alone application or website. Since books are largely on business/education/technical non-fiction content, focus of game elements will be based around intrinsic rather than extrinsic motivation. A social (professional networking as well as personal social) structure will allow readers to interact with each other to learn about content within the books. PBL elements will include progress bars of reading an individual book and its accompanying technical elements (provide videos/games/examples/activities online to supplement the content). Points/status can be achieved by helping others, and by completing activities. Badges can also be tied to such activities.