# 12.1 Beyond the Basics

Guess what? You've reached the very last unit in the
course. You know what that means. Yes, you've earned a badge. All right, it's the same old badge that
I've given you several times before, and it happens to be the
logo for the course. But you should feel a sense of
accomplishment getting this far. Maybe I'll embellish it, make it a badge
with a happy face here. Maybe that will make it seem a little more
valuable to you. But seriously, we've come a long way. We've covered a great deal of ground in
this course, many different aspects of gamification, and related areas that feed
into doing gamification successfully. So in this final unit, I'd like to
introduce the last set of material by looking a little bit at
where we've come before. And then pointing in a direction of where
we're going to go in the last few lecture
segments. At the very beginning of the class, I gave
you a set of learning goals, and I think it's healthy towards the end to review
what we've done and how they match up with those
goals. So the first goal was to talk about what
gamification is. And I spent a good deal of time both
defining what gamification meant and also positioning it
around other kinds of concepts. Things like serious games and so forth,
that have some similar aspects, but which should be
understand, understood separately. So hopefully, you now have a better
feeling when you hear about gamification. What exactly it means and how it's
different from, for example, just playing a game, either for fun or in
a workplace context. Second is why gamification might be
valuable. We've looked at a whole bunch of examples,
examples from marketing, examples from human resources, examples from enterprise
context, examples from social impact. In all of them, I've tried to show how the
game elements and the game design techniques feed into real business value
or achieving real legitimate goals. It does not mean gamification works in
every case. And I've also tried to show you very
concretely limitations, concerns, areas where gamification might
not be the right approach. And areas where there's some legitimate
concerns and criticisms leveled against either gamification, in general,
or specific ways that it's applied. But you should come out of this with an
understanding of some of the areas, at least where we have
some reason to believe that this is a technique that's
not just really interesting or exciting, but that seems to be able to
deliver real results. Third, how to do it effectively. As I've said, I've talked a lot about
different forms of gamification. I've given you a full-fledged design framework to step-by-step apply
gamification. It should be obvious by now that
gamification is not any time a game is involved or any time points and
leaderboards and badges are involved. It has to be done under a structure that
lets you tie the particular steps you're taking
to those objectives and understand the panoply of tools that
you have available to apply gamification in the right way to
the right situation. And finally, we've looked at lots of
specific ex examples. Examples in many different domains to show
the breadth of areas where gamification can be
applied. All right. So that's what we've done up until now. Where are we going next? In this final unit of the class, I want to
show you some aspects of gamification. Things to be done that relate to game
elements or to game design. But that are broader than the that ones we
have covered here before in the class. Each of them could really be an entire
unit of the class, and they tie into much larger and broader
debates in other areas, but they are worth touching on before we go to give
you a sense of some of the other things we'll be doing
with games and game-like structures. The first is prizes. So, the use of rewards, where the goal is
to encourage people to, do something. And the mechanism is instead of picking
someone and saying, all right we'll pay you to do it or some
other mechanism, having a prize and saying, the
winner is the one who does best, and they get some sum
of money. So I call this competitive in that this is an approach that's trying to mobilize
large numbers of people, but using their competitive
instincts to try to win something as the mechanism to
encourage them to participate. There's also a set of activities
encouraging large numbers of people to participate in a
collaborative way which broadly here, I'm calling collective
action a lot of what it involves could be called
crowdsourcing. So these are mechanisms to get people to
work together on problems. Not necessarily people who are employees
or participants already in an organization,
but people coming in because of the interest level
and the fun factor of the activity. The third one is virtual economics. And so I've all ready talked about virtual goods and virtual currencies in some
context, but I want to take a deeper look at how economic pressures and techniques can be applied to
virtual goods. And how gamifying things can potentially
create a kind of functioning economy, which need to be managed in the same way that real
world economies need to be managed. And can also provide some of the dynamism and benefits that the real world economies
provide. And then, last but certainly not least,
we'll look towards the future and think about a couple different visions
about where gamification could go. Is it something that will be used
primarily for good? Or something that primarily will be
dangerous as it scales up beyond the kinds of applications that
we've seen for today?