# 6.2 Dangers of Behaviorism

There are some real dangers to the
behaviorist approach to gamification. I've already mentioned the limitations
that, that approach doesn't get you focus as much on what's
actually going on, what's really deep down
motivating people but they're also some areas where it can be
problematic. The first is what I started to get to in
the previous segment. Manipulation, the idea that these are
systems that are designed to make people do things and maybe, that's something the people
want to do but maybe, it's something that they don't necessarily want to do and if game application is about leveraging these
aspects of our psychology, the way the brain responds
to rewards and to feedback and so forth, leveraging them to achieve someone else's
desired results, that has the potential to be
problematic. And this ties back in with the slot
machine that I showed you earlier. This is an addiction machine and if you're a casino operator, then it looks like a
great thing but there are lots and lots of negative consequences that come about,
because people are addicted to gambling and to other things and if we can design systems that are optimized
to addict people, if you will, on these virtual
rewards that doesn't mean that we should and it doesn't
mean that we should as an ethical matter. It also doesn't mean that companies should
purely as a tactical or strategic matter because
there's a real danger if users feel like they're
being pushed into something they don't really
want to do. A danger in terms of the response from the
customers. A danger in terms of responses from
government agencies and a danger in terms of the company itself not focusing on what it
should be focused on, which is really delighting
it's customers. So there is a danger in going down this
path of a behaviorist approach that it tends to make us see everything like a
casino owner and maybe that's not necessarily, the right way to approach
all business situations. Second challenge or problem with the
behaviorist approach is what's called the hedonic
treadmill. So this word hedonic here, from the word hedonism, this just means pleasure based
on fun. It doesn't have the same connotation that
hedonism does in the colloquial sense. If you don't know what I mean, go look it
up, but the idea here is that the hedonic
treadmill means, once you start focusing on giving people rewards in order to give
them pleasure that feedback loop effect, based on the way the dopamine
system works in the brain. Once you start doing that, you better keep
doing it because if people learn to respond to the reward, then they're only
going to respond when the reward is there. Think about the speed camera lottery
example, when I talked about the traffic monitoring signs that showed
people how fast they were going. If that's only going to make people slow
down when they see the sign, it's not really going to change
behavior in a systematic way. So if you want to get people to slow down,
you better put a whole lot of those monitoring signs up because otherwise,
there's not going to be any effect and so in gamification, this
means to the extent that there are rewards that are
designed in this way, the designer needs to keep
putting in more rewards to keep people interested
and as certain rewards get familiar or boring,
you have to come up with new rewards. More interesting rewards. More challenging objectives to achieve the
rewards and so forth. So this could put a significant burden on
the gamification designer to keep up and in some ways, in fact, it's worse
than that and we understand this now because of studies that look into
what's actually happening in the brain when this dopamine system activates
and these are studies, for example, involving
monkeys. And the way these studies work, here again
is this graph showing over time what someone
does and what their response is the monkeys would
get a squirt of grape juice at a random time
interval. Monkeys, I guess, it turns out like grape
juice more so than bananas but the monkeys love the grape juice and they
hooked up electrodes to the monkey's brains in this studies and they found that
sure enough, when the monkey got the squirt of grape juice, the dopamine neurons fired and there was the expected
result. The system was activated. The monkey had that chemical high, if you
will, based on the reward but then the experimenters
did something interesting. They reconfigured the system, so that
exactly two seconds prior to the grape juice spray, a tone
would go off. Just a tone. Not something the monkey, particularly,
liked or didn't like. Just a tone but it was always, exactly,
the same distance before the reward. The reward was a variable reward, the
timing of the grape juice spray was random but every time the tone went off, the
grape juice would come two seconds later. So what happened then? Very interesting. Turns out that no longer did the dopamine
response come about in response to or at the same time as the
grape juice spray. Instead, the monkeys didn't have that
dopamine activation, even when they got the grape
juice. They still liked the grape juice, they
still drank it but it didn't create that pleasure
response in the brain. Instead, where did they get the pleasure
response? You can guess. When the tone went off. So what's going on here? The monkeys brains figured out the
pattern. They figured out that the tone was what
signaled the reward. The tone was the thing that was
unexpected, that was variable. That was the thing that was interesting. So that's what then set off the dopamine system, even though the tone was just a
tone, there was no benefit or pleasurable thing
about it to the monkey, that's what the brains
responded too. Again, brains are pattern recognition
engines and they try to figure out problems and so, human
brains do this in spades and what this means is, the dopamine system is really not
about rewards. It doesn't give pleasure for rewards, it gives pleasure for the anticipation of
rewards. When we know the reward is coming, that's
when we get the dopamine hit and what that means is, if you're designing a gamified system and you're
designing it in this behaviorist form, where it's all
about the rewards, you have to keep people anticipating the rewards because if they
don't, then it no longer has that feedback loop. It no longer has that pleasure affect that
generates the results and people's brains are always
trying to figure out the system, always trying to
find the pattern at which point the game's no
longer interesting. They no longer have the same result for
the reward. Even if you're still giving them rewards. Even if there's more badges and more
quests and more achievements and so forth, it's no longer fun and so,
there's a danger in using too much of a behaviorist
approach that you kill the very rewards that you're relying on by
making them become expected. Third concern about behaviorist
gamification and this one is really more specific to
gamification. When gamification focuses too much on
behavior, it tends to focus heavily, as I've talked about, on rewards and those
tend to be typically non-tangible rewards. They're just things like badges and being
at the top of a leaderboard and those more often than
not, are based around status. Status is a very powerful motivator. It's not something tangible but we do lots
of things to get status. We do lots of things because we want
people to think that we're cool. That's the reality in the terms of how people act and so, gamification
leverages that fact that we love status and it learns from things like frequent flyer or loyalty
programs. Here you see the United Mileage Plus
Program and they tend to focus a lot on the great status you get if
you're in the higher tiers. You get better seats, you get to board
first, you get access to the lounge. You get in some cases to walk on a red
carpet going on the plane. You get a special card that no one else
gets. You're cool. You have high status because you're at the
top of the program and the notion is people chase
that status and yeah, people do but if you just focus on
that, you tend to think that everyone chases
status all the time. That's just not the way people work. So when I say everyone here isn't Tom
Stuker, Tom Stuker is the number one leader in the United
Frequent Flyer program. He's flown over 10 million miles on United
Airlines. He's had whole planes named after him
because he's so far at the top of their leaderboard and you can
say, well, that's great. Look how the Mileage Plus Program
motivated Tom Stuker but most of us look at that and say, I'm not flying 10
million miles. There's no way I'm getting to that point. There's no way I'm going to put so much
energy into flying and flying and flying, even if I
think there's some status value, that's just not important
enough to me and status does motivate people but it certainly
doesn't motivate everyone all the time. We're not all constantly looking for that
social approval and looking for people to think that we're cool in
every walk of life. We do things for lots of other reasons. We do things for tangible reasons. We do things for altruistic reasons. We do things for social reasons with our
friends. There are lots of reasons we do things
that status doesn't explain and the behaviorist approach has a tendency in gameification to reduce down
to a heavy status focus, which tends to lead
to missing of some of the other kinds of benefits that can be
delivered from a gamified system.