# 5.3 Behaviorism in Gamification

How does behaviorism relate to
gamification? There are several valuable lessons that can be gleamed from the behavioral
psychology research that inform much of the gamification samples that are out there
today. The first lesson is look at what people
actually do. Remember, the basis of the behaviorist
approach was not to focus on understanding people's subjective mental states but to
watch their external responses to stimuli. And where that's useful, even today is
recognizing that people don't always behave in the way that you
might think. So behavioral economics, for example,
thinks about and looks at cognitive biases when people, for example,
are averse to lawsuits. Even though under basic economic theory,
they should be indifferent to the same probability of a gain or a
loss. When we study what people actually do, we
do empirical studies. We find that the results are quite
different. So a behaviorist approach is helpful in
correcting for the biases we have about how people are going to act, and they can uncover certain kinds of actions that may be
valuable. So, for example, at the beginning of the
class, I gave you the example of the speed camera lottery, which was built on these
signs that track how fast you're going. And you might think that telling people
how fast they're going won't cause them to slow down unless they
get a ticket every time they speed, but it turns out that
even without the lotteries, people will slow down when
these signs are put in place. They're now in use throughout the United
States. On average, study suggests people slow
about 10%. Just with the signs, this more gamified
example that I gave you with the lottery aspect to it caused a
slow down of roughly 20% in Sweden when it was tried, but even
without that there are results based on what people do in
reaction to those signs. So we shouldn't ignore that just because
it seems like there's no direct punishment for
speeding past the sign. If in fact people slow down, then that's
something useful, and we can employ that. That's a behaviorist kind of insight. The second and related insight is to focus
on feedback. The traffic sign about how fast you're
going is a kind of feedback, and as I've talked about a number of times feedback is essential to the vast majority of video
games. When you do something, you get points. You see an immediate reaction to your activity, and that tells you what you're
doing. You don't have to wait all the way to the end of the process to know how well you're
doing. And feedback we also see in gamification. So this was, if you'll recall, the
progress bar example from LinkedIn. And part of what makes this effective in
making people fill out the profile more is that it gives
you feedback. It says guess what, you're 90% of the way
there. You may have known that you were some of
the way there. Maybe you had seen somewhere how far along
you were, but to actually see right in front
of you, you're 90% of the way there and then to give you a small step up, to say
alright. You're now here on the ladder. You're, you're right here at this point on
the step ladder, but if you want to get up a little bit further, we
will tell you how to get to the next step. That's another part of feedback, and
that's what you see here on this simple seeming 95% on the Linked
In progress bar. It says here's how to break down the problem so there's just a little more to
go. So feedback about where you are and
feedback about how to get to the next step using small
quantifiable goals. Those are processes we see in lots of
kinds of behavior change programs for things like weight loss and
alcohol cessation and so forth. And they're effective in many cases
because they draw upon these behavioral insights that people respond to specific quantitative, regular, immediate feedback
about their behavior. The next lesson to take from behaviorism
is that consequences can relate results
because they condition people. This was the loop that I talked about with
operant conditioning. And to the extent that it works, it works
based on people learning to associate certain results from what happens in a
game or some other kind of system. So here's an example from Farmville, the spectacularly successful social Facebook
game from Zynga. Farmville has this concept of crops
withering. The game is about you creating your own
farm. You grow different kinds of crops and
build things up and so forth, but you have to water the crops periodically because if
you don't, the crops look like these ones
here. They wither, and each set of crops has a
specific time limit when the crops, mature and they
can be harvested. You want to harvest the crops because then
you can use them for other things, but, at a certain
point in time, if you don't harvest them and don't water
them enough, they turn into these brown withered things
that you see here. And what FarmVille was able to do based on this structure was create what's called an
appointment mechanic. And the idea is that people know that they
have to come back at a certain time interval to water their crops or to harvest them because if not, they're going
to wither. And that creates this draw because people
start to realize, well, I'd better check in every day or maybe every hour to make
sure my crops aren't withering. To make sure that I kept things up to
date, because if I don't, then I'm going to lose
out. And this draw of having to constantly
check in and tend to your virtual farm was part of what
made Farmville so powerful and successful
because it got people learning to just as a matter of habit regularly
check back in. That's a very behavioral kind of approach
which worked well for Farmville. And it also underlies many of the PBL type
examples of gamification. So, early on, I gave you the example of
the MLB.com badges that you would collect when you watched any video of the games
based on certain things that happened. And I gave you the quotes from that blog
where people were saying, gee, what is it that's so
addictive about this? Why are we obsessed with collecting these
badges? And the reason is a behavioral kind of feedback loop that people see that when
they take the action, they get the badge, and that
feels rewarding to them for reasons that I'll
talk about. And they learn through that operant
conditioning process, that if they keep doing that,
keep watching the videos, they'll get more
badges, and there's a kind of addictive quality to it. That gets people, at least some people, to
want to come back more and more. So that's a behavioral kind of structure
in a gamification example. Now, just to preview what's coming later,
don't take away from this that all gamification works this way or that
all gamification should work this way. There's some real problems and limitations
to this notion that gamification is like addiction, and it's
about creating these behavioral loops. But it's worth noting that this is
something that does work in some cases and understanding where
it comes from. Now, basically, the idea here is about
rewards. So behaviorism talks about conditioning,
but specifically this example with the badges is about rewarding
people. It's about giving them some benefit, something that seems valuable even though
it's not tangible or not worth any money and reinforcing by continually providing
those rewards. Much of the PBL type gamification, that's
out there is very focused on the notion of
rewards. And one reason that I gave you the whole pyramid of elements before was to
emphasise that rewards are valuable, but they're just one
of the kinds of game mechanics that are out
there. Here they are here, and you see all these other kinds of mechanics that are not
specifically about rewards. So rewards are real, but they should only
be one piece in the toolbox. That being said, when we go down a level
to the components, to the more surface level aspects of
gamification, at least the ones that are regular patterns in many of the
examples today, you'll see that a great many of them tie in at least in some
way to rewards. So achievements, badges, boss fights,
collections, content unlocking, leaderboards, levels, points, quest, and
virtual goods all can or necessarily link into the idea
of earning some kinds of rewards. So rewards are very powerful and very
significant in gamification, but keep in the back of your head that they should not
be the only thing that you think about. Now why are these rewards so powerful? Why do people talk about things like
obsession, like a moth to a flame, addiction when they're
referring to these silly little badges or to
something in a game that has no real or tangible value? The reason comes back again to psychology
and specifically to brain chemistry. And it relates to something called the
dopamine system. The structure in the brain that is
associated with pleasure and interestingly also
associated with learning. And our brains release and reabsorb the
neurotransmitter dopamine in response to certain
activities, and rewards. Things that we find rewarding or valuable,
or sometimes just surprising tend to cause that dopamine release, and that
gives you literally a shot of a drug. It's literally pleasurable, and that
causes you to make that association of the activity and
the pleasure. It causes that learning process and causes
people to literally feel a, a little bit like they have to go back and
engage in the activity. So you see here Samsung Nation, the PBL
type gamification site that I've showed you a
few times before. This is an example of one badge that you
get, and the idea here is, when you unlock this badge, it says,
sweet, you just unlocked a badge. And this one is just by hanging out. So, you didn't do anything, right? You're just hanging out on the site. And it says poof, you get a badge. All of a sudden there's something there. There's something that manifests, that,
that you didn't necessarily expect in return for spending time on the
site. And to the extend that that works. Again I caution you. This doesn't always work. It doesn't work for everyone, but the
thing that is working there when it does work is that dopamine hit, that sense of ooh that comes
about in your brain associating the reward with
the activity. And so behavioral gamification tends to
focus on creating rewards that maximize that engagement
based on dopamine release, and based on that addictive
quality that we also see in lots of social games like
Farmville and so forth