# 12.3 Virtual Economies

What happens when we add money, or things that work like money, to a gamified
system? Then we're in the realm of virtual
economics. And it's possible to get there in a number
of different ways. Many gamified systems have rewards, things
that the players get and they're often virtual rewards,
things like badges. Well, if those rewards are persistent, if
they're things that endure throughout
participating in the activity, especially if the player goes away and comes back, then they can start to function as virtual
goods. If the system is designed in a way that
gives them some scarcity value, some of them are
harder to get than others. Some of them are less widely available
than others. Then those virtual goods can appear to
have value to the players, just like a real world
physical good does. The second way to bring in virtual
economics, is to have point systems that involve points
that are tradeable or redeemable. I.e.you can get the points and use them to buy a variety of different things in the
gamified system, which themselves are virtual goods
then, or you can redeem the points for things in the
physical world. For a coupon or even for money in the
physical world. In that case, we're starting to deal with
a virtual currency. The points now operate like real money. They're a currency. They're a medium of exchange. What is a dollar or a Euro, or a Reminbi? It's not a thing in and of itself. It's just an accounting mechanism that's
tradeable for other real world things, that we want, because people in that society, with the
backing of governments, are willing to make that
exchange. And say, if you give me a certain amount
of money, I will recognize it and give you some
other kinds of goods. So, the same thing can be true of point
systems in gamified systems. If they are exchangeable for other things
that people value, then they can operate like a
currency. And finally, if the system allows
transactions, if participants in the virtual system can
trade with each other, directly or through some
marketplace, then potentially we're in the realm of a full blown virtual
economy. And we've seen this in a variety of
massively multiplayer online games. Things like EVE Online as well as some
virtual worlds like Second Light that are designed to
have functioning virtual economies. And all of these can exist to a greater or
lesser extent in gamified systems. So a couple of examples, virtual goods are a widespread phenomenon in many social
games today. So games like Farmville. One of the ways that they were so
successful as businesses, was they recognized that virtual goods could be
unlocked as a way to monetize the game. Doesn't cost anything to play, but in
order to achieve certain things easily in the
game, or to get certain rare goods in the game,
you've got to start to spend real money. So people think of those virtual goods as being really worth something, either
because they had to pay for them, or because they had
to work very hard to get them. This has been so successful that overall
the virtual goods market is estimated at $7 billion worldwide in 2010,
growing to 13 billion by 2016. But it's not just games. Gamified systems can have aspects of
virtual goods and virtual currencies, and potentially even
virtual economies as well. Think in particular about the gamified systems that are derived from loyalty
programs. So here is an example that I picked out,
almost at random, from NesCafe Australia
something called Cup of Rewards. Typical loyalty type program. You get points for going to the site and putting in a code, because you bought your
NesCafe products. And you accumulate the points, and then
you can exchange them for discounts and for coupons to use on
various other sorts of products. That's a virtual currency. It's making those points tradeable and
redeemable for real world benefits. And therefore, it works like a virtual
good or like a currency in any other case. The issue with a lot of these virtual
currencies though, as with many other examples of
gamification, and many other examples of loyalty programs,
is that they're typically not built today with a focus on
fun. With a focus on the design aspects of
effective gamification. They assume that just the fact that you can just redeem these points for tangible
goods, will be enough to motivate you to come back and participate and buy the desired
products. But as we've seen throughout this class,
tangible rewards have serious limitations. And to the extent that a virtual currency
is just a way to harness a gamified system to tangible extrinsic
rewards, it has all the limitations that I've already
talked about. But it doesn't have to be that way. These systems can be designed in ways that focus on fun and that systematically, are
designed to unlock intrinsic motivation, and that
can also feed into the virtual economic aspects of
the system. If designed well, these systems can have the attributes of both gamification and
economics. So what does it take to design a
successful virtual economy? The key skill is balance. I've talked about balance as one of the
attributes of game design. It's ensuring the game is not too hard,
too easy, too fast, too slow. One side doesn't always win, but balance
is also critical in economics, because economics
is about, not necessarily money. It's about scarcity. Anytime there is scarcity, when people
make choices under those conditions of scarcity, they will tend to
exhibit economic behavior. And scarcity is a variable in a gamified
system that's defined, at least at some level, by
the designer. And in any system where people have the
ability to use virtual goods or virtual currencies, it's important to ensure that
there's the right level of scarcity. The designer has to constantly balance, to
ensure that there's not too much money, which
leads to inflation and effectively devalues the
currency, or too little, in which case, it's too hard to
get. This is a process that can be called using
faucets and drains. Faucets are things that put money into the
economy. And drains are things that take it out of
the economy. I guess if it's a drain then I should
probably draw it this way, as you're going down the
drain. But there are ways of balancing how much
money there is in the economy. They could also be be called and sometimes
are, sources and sinks. The design technique is to ensure that the
balance is right. If you've got too much money in the system
it won't be good or too little. Recall when I talked about the game
Monopoly that when you pass go you get $200. That's putting money into the system, when you want to buy houses and hotels which
are very valuable things, you have to pay
money and that takes money out of the system. And this is something that effective game
designers, building games around virtual economies,
have learned to do. For example in World of Warcraft, way back
at the beginning of the class, I showed you a
little snippet of my character, and at the end of that clip, he turned into a dragon and
flew away. Well that dragon is something called the Sandstone Drake is something that's pretty
hard to get in World of Warcraft, or at least it
was when it first came out. But that's also, once you have the ability
to make it, really expensive to make. And the reason is that the designers of
the game were trying to balance, with this and other things, the
level of money in the world. And by creating something that's really
desirable, because it's rare and hard to get, and therefore,
high level players, ones who typically have a
lot of money are going to try to get it. And by making that thing really expensive,
they create a way of taking money out of the economy. And therefore ensuring that people don't
just get richer and richer, to the point where the system goes
out of balance. So building a gamified system is about
ensuring that level of balance, wanting people to
be incentivized to take money out of the
economy in the right times and the right amounts. And also putting enough money into the
economy so things don't get too expensive and too
hard to purchase. The final point I'll make is that there's
some real dangers in building these virtual economies, even
though they have lots of potential benefits. We're talking about systems that may
involve real money, or real tangible goods as rewards, and
those are costly. And so, organizations setting up gamified
systems that have these attributes need to make sure that they understand what
kinds of obligations they're taking on. Secondly, they tend to be tangible
extrinsic rewards. So all the concepts that I talked about
earlier about the hedonic treadmill effect, where rewards start to
become less and less desirable, and the crowding out effect, where people
actually become less motivated for the activity itself, because they think it's
so tied up in the reward. All of that's very relevant and an
important caution to think about when building systems that
have virtual economics in them. You don't want to build a system that
falls into the trap of these tangible extrinsic rewards demotivating the
enjoyable behavior. In order to ensure that the intrinsic
motivation is still there, it's important to think about the scarcity and rarity and
surprise value of the virtual goods. If something feels cool, not necessarily
because it's valuable in a tangible sense, but because its something that's
difficult to achieve, like that dragon in World of Warcraft, or it's really
interesting and looks great within the gamified system, that might be something
that still feels valuable to the players. Even though or basically independent of
the tangible value associated with it. So there's much more that I could say
about designing virtual economies. I wanted to put this unit in though just to ensure that you think about the
potential of this as one technique to employ in gamified systems or other kinds of game
like systems. But always be sure to do it in a way
that's cognizant of all of the points that I've made
elsewhere in the course.