# 7.1 The Design Process

In this unit, I'm going to give you a
design framework to apply all of the basic concepts about gamification that we've talked about so
far. But first, I need to talk to you about
just what design is. Design is not just art, or illustration,
or creative expression. Design is a process of attacking problems. And we tend to think about design as
something that designers do. Something that is used in creative
pursuits, whether it's advertising or graphic design or user
experience design online. But design is really a general approach to
addressing challenges. Which is particularly useful in
gamification. There've been a number of, leading
commentators and experts in recent years who've talked about the
concept of design thinking. People like Rodger Martin, who's the dean
of the business school at the University of
Toronto and David Kelly who, was one of the leaders of IDO the, a well known product design company
in Silicon Valley. They have argued that design thinking
should be a process that all business engages in for any purpose and while I'm
not going to go into all of the details of design thinking,
it's worth having an understanding of some of its major principles in order to apply
them to gamification specifically. So, what is design actually mean? And this is my synthesis of a bunch of
different viewpoints of many people that highlight some of the
major aspects of design thinking. The first thing about design thinking is
that it's purposive i.e., it has a goal. You're not just trying to make something
beautiful. You're not just trying to create a process
that does certain things. You're trying to achieve some objective. And everything in the process has to tie
into that purpose. So. if you're building a gamified system
because you want your employees to generate more ideas
for innovation in your company and you want to promote that kind of innovative activity,
that's the goal. And the design of the gamification system
needs to constantly refer back to achieving that
goal. The second aspect of design thinking is
that it's human centered. So, what does that mean? What's not human centered? It's not cow centered or cat centered. No, the idea is it's designed around
people. Early on, I talked about the notion of calling your participants in a gamified
system players. And I talked about some of the healthy aspects of thinking of someone as a
player. As opposed to a user or a customer or, god
forbid, a consumer and that relates to this notion in design thinking that
everything should be based on the person. We are coming up with solutions for
people. People are going to use them. Robots are not going to use them, human
beings are going to use them. And so, what that means is, we always have
to think about the experience. It's not just a set of objectives or a set of metrics, although those will be
important in, developing the system. It's real people, who have real lives, who
want to do things, or to reach objectives in their lives and
they're going to encounter this thing. They're going to encounter this designed
artifact. Whether that is a website like amazon.com
or a shopping cart or a gamified system. They're going to encounter it and they're
going to encounter it as an experience. And I've already talked about the fact
that the experience is somehow greater than the game and greater
than the game element. Design thinking is about always pushing
for the experience and trying to keep in mind what that experience
actually looks like to people. And, and remember that the experience of
the player is not the experience of the designer who's seeing all the moving
parts of the system from the outside. Third element of design thinking is
balance. The idea is, we sometimes use analytical thinking, we break things down into
smaller parts. We try to come up with algorithms,
formalized ways of solving problems. But, sometimes we also need to be
creative. Sometimes we need to have hunches,
intuitions. Sometimes things are artistic and
beautiful and elegant and you can't reduce it to a formula. Design Thinking is about balancing those
two things. If you just have analytics, just numbers,
just quantitative formal structures, your process will be
too dry and formal. You won't really address people's
experiential needs and you'll miss lots of opportunities for
creativity and innovation. Because those tend to lie outside of what
the formulas tell us. We tend to use things like heuristics,
vaguer sense of, vaguer kinds of frameworks, when formal algorithms don't
solve problems. And sometimes we don't even have heurist,
heuristics, we just have individual examples that we're trying to
put together and find patterns around. So, design thinking is about balancing
those two things. And in particular, focusing on what's in
the middle. Focusing on what we do when there's some
data, but insufficient data to give us a clear,
clean, structured algorithm. And that often involves what's called
abductive reasoning. Which was a term developed by Charles
Sanders Peirce. A philosopher who was one of the developers of the philosoble,
philosophical system called pragmatism. And Peirce talked about abductive
reasoning as a number of things, but essentially about inference
from insufficient information. So, we don't have enough information to
reach a judgment. We don't quite know what the solution is,
but we've got kind of a guess, or a rough
explanation. We start with the best explanation that
we've got, and then we make an inference from
there. That's what design thinking is all about. Jumping that intuitive leap that we can
make. But it's got to be based on a foundation. It's not just wild speculation. We've got an initial best available
explanation and then we try and jump from there, make that
abductive leap. Finally, design thinking is iterative. In other words, it inherently expects that
we're not going to get it right the first time. We're not going to build a system that is
perfect. We have to bake in from the beginning the
idea of trying, failing, learning, trying again and iteration means
doing the same thing multiple times but improving over time
through the process. And it turns out this is critically
important aspect of game design which is a design
practice. The notion that you don't build a game
just by sitting down and drawing out the art work and putting in the
characters and building out the game. You start with a rough version of the
game. This is also not so different from the way
things like movies get made. You start with, a rough prototype,
something that gives you the basic fundamental skeleton of the
game play. There's a bunch of cards and we're going
to trade them and they have these things on them and they get put
together in the following way. And then, in games on you play test, in other words, create the roughest
possible prototype. Just pieces of paper often, with scribbles
on them. That just give some sense about the basic
structural elements. The dynamics and mechanics, typically, of
the game. And then give it to some people. Let real people actually try and play with
it. It's not going to be a very good game at
that point, in most cases, but when you actually let
people use the rules, and use the mechanics that you set up,
then you start to see how they operate in practice, how they
interact with one another. What the experience is kind of going to be
like and then based on that, either it works or it
doesn't, you iterate and improve. And through a series of these iterations,
you get prototypes that are more and more faithful to the end
state, the ultimate game. That's a very typical kind of process in
design and one that's useful to employee
gamification as well. If you try to go from 0 to 60, if you try to start from nothing and then
immediately implement a gamified system, you're almost certain to
miss out on important aspects of what the player, the experience is
going to be like. So, iteration is a way of overcoming that. That's a few sets of basic guidelines for
design as a process. Specifically for gamification, my
colleague, Dan Hunter, and I have developed a six step process
for implementing gamified systems and this process is brought to you
by the letter D. [SOUND] And the number six, because there
are six steps and each of them happens to start with the
letter D. So, let me give you the six steps really
quickly and in the subsequent videos, I'll unpack each
of them in more detail. Step one is define, define your business
objectives. What is this system designed to
accomplish? What are it's goals? Remember, design has to be purposive. Second, what are the target behaviors? What is it that you want people to do? Gamification is about motivation. It's about encouraging people to do
certain things. And therefore, you need to start out with an understanding of just what those things
are. Third, describe your players. Human centric, player centric, that's the essence of design and design for
gamification. So, you need to have some understanding
about who's going to be using this thing? What are they like? And how can the gamified system respond to the different kinds of players that you
have? Next is, devise your activity loops. There are two kinds of loops that move
forward the action in a gamified system. We call them engagement loops, and
progression loops. This is where you structure the core micro
and macro level game play aspects. Number five, don't forget the fun. This comes back to the discussion that we
had earlier about game thinking. And just how important fun is, how
difficult it is to define, but how we can look at certain kinds of characteristics that in different ways
make things fun. Paradoxically, that's easy to miss when
you're doing gamification because gamification is about
coming up with structures and rules and processes and
systems to achieve those objectives that I talked
about before. And very often, people who are going down
that road get so caught up that they lose sight of the fact that these systems
should in some way be engaging, they should be
fun. Whether consciously or not for the
players, because if not, they're missing out on a lot of what makes
gamification potentially so powerful. And then finally, deploy. Use the right tools for the right job. Use the right elements, use the right
structures and put them into place in the gamified
system. Six Ds for gamification design, which
we'll look at in significantly more detail in the next
few segments