# 9.1 Enterprise Applications

This week we're going to look at some
specific applications of gamification. Many of the examples I've given you
are in the external gamefication bucket. They're about customer
facing types of uses. In this unit, I'm going to look at
internal gamification, and specifically gamification in the enterprise in
a large business organization. Many major enterprises are starting
to experiment with gamification, and to apply it in concrete situations. Sometimes consciously, thinking that
they are trying to gamify a process. Sometimes just using
a technique that seems to work. That when we look at it we would
identify as being part of gamification. The research from Constellation Research,
put out a report at the end of last year, where they talked to 55 different early
adopters of enterprise gamification. And found a wide range of different
kinds of uses within the enterprise. I'd like to highlight a few examples for
you, major areas where I see potential take up by enterprises and
give you an example for each of them. The first is intranets or extranets. Online collaboration systems that
companies operate for their employees or their extended networks. And gamification here works just like
it does in the external setting with a discussion forum like stack overflow. The game elements can be used to
encourage people to contribute. To encourage people to comment and respond, to enhance the quality of
the participation that people engage in. And to develop leaderboards to identify
people who have the most expertise or the most involvement in certain topics. So here you see a set of leaderboards for
the SAP community network. Which is the extranet for
the enterprise software company SAP and their network of developers. That interact with SAP
software at other companies. And they very actively use gamification
techniques to enhance the quality of the discussion in that form. So that's an enterprise case because it's
being used internally by an enterprise. But the same basic dynamics that
we saw with stack overflow, and really any other discussion
forum kind of application. The next one though, is different. This is about productivity. And when I say productivity enhancement,
I mean. Helping or encouraging employees
to do their core job better. There are many different
examples of this and there are many different kinds of jobs. So what it takes to
motivate a salesperson. Maybe different from what it takes
to motivate an accountant or an financial analyst but
in almost every case. Gamification can produce motivation and
can provide information and feedback. That is valuable to employees and
helps them improve their job performance. Here's one concrete example
which comes from call centers. So call centers have
large numbers of agents. And they have to encourage those agents
to first of all deal with calls quickly, because the longer they're on the phone
the more cost there is for the customer. And, at the same time they want
to encourage the agents to deal with the customers well. Because, the ultimate customers, the customers of the people
using the call center business, will tend to be upset if the agent is
clueless or surly, or anything like that. So, the call center operators
are starting to look to gamification as a technique to help them manage
these customer service agents better. This is an example from
a startup called Arcaris, which is specifically focused on
this call center enterprise market. And you see here on the right a screen
that would come up for an agent. And it's got a leaderboard,
she's number one. It's got a set of levels that she
can achieve by virtue of her various activities on dealing with calls. It's got some customer satisfaction
numbers that show some data on how she's doing, and it's got achievement, so
all the standard gamification elements. But here focused in specifically,
on encouraging better performance for a customer service agent, and highlighting
the key elements in designed in an aesthetic way that works for
that application. This here, that you see on the left,
is a screen that the company might get, looking at key performance indicators,
that's what KPI stands for. And integrating in those business metrics with the data coming out
of the gamification engine. Allowing them to monitor their
employee performance and use the gamification system to
improve the level of productivity. Now let me put a placeholder here,
which I'm going to expand on later. That there's a danger in this kind
of application, that the gamified system could actually, rather than
helping the call center agents. Be a tool for oppressing them and constantly monitoring their work in
a way that's not helpful to them. So let's keep that in mind as a risk, but it certainly can be
done in a positive way. Which I think this is an example of. Next category i'll call
efficiency enhancement. The difference between productivity and efficiency here is productivity is in
someone's core job responsibility. Efficiency is about just
making them work better by doing everything they
do at work efficiently. And specifically the example
I wanna talk about is email. So lots and
lots of workers spend time in their email. And it's not their job,
primarily, to answer email, but they have to do it as part of their job. And people waste tons and
tons of time, countless hours. Answering email, getting email that's
irrelevant, cleaning out their mailbox and so forth. And so gamification is being used to
improve the efficiency of that process. The example that I show you here
is something called The Email Game from a company called Baitin. And you see here that they've got a timer,
so you see how much time you're
spending in your email. You see this progress bar of
how much you've got left, and you see a point system. And the way the email game works
is that you get points for quickly disposing of your email. For deleting it or responding to it in a way that you
can take it out of your inbox. It incentivizes and encourages you
to deal with email efficiently. And that little nudge tends to give people enough reason to deal with their email
in a more efficient way, saving lots and lots of time that gets freed up for
other things. Another interesting approach to email
is being taken by a company called Seriosity that has a system called Attent. And their idea was to create
a virtual currency around email. So they created a set of tokens
that you attach to email. And it costs you this virtual
currency to send and receive email. And the idea is by creating
this kind of virtual economy, people will start to think about
whether it's worth sending an email. Well, if it actually costs something and
I've only got so many resources and I have to use some of
them to send this email. Do I really want to send all
to the whole company about this particular irrelevant thing? Or not. And, so the idea here is that by creating
a structure that provides feedback. And the ability manipulate the activity
around email In a game like way. People will start to see their
effects on the overall system, that kind of systems thinking
that games can encourage. And therefore be more responsible about
the email that they send and receive. So a different approach
tackling a similar problem and their other problems in
the efficiency domain as well. Situations where gamification can be used
to encourage people to waste less time. And therefore have more time for
their core jobs. The next one I don't have a screenshot
for, but this is an example from Deloitte, where they have an application
called WhoWhatWhere. That is used to encourage
their consultants to find out more about each other. That's in the broad domain
of knowledge management. Companies don't necessarily
collaborate internally that well, especially a very
knowledge oriented company. Like a consulting firm has people all
over the world with tremendous amounts of knowledge about customers and
about topics. And yet they don't necessarily
know about each other. And it would be really helpful for
the company. If when a consultant in
Cleveland had a question about, say, supply chain process improvements
in the oil and gas industry. That they would be able to quickly
see who else in my company has worked on those engagements or who
else has real knowledge about that area. So gamification can be
a way of encouraging people to provide that
information into the system. And facilitating a process that
encourages that kind of sharing. The who, what, where system at Deloid
does that by creating game mechanics around the consultants sharing
information about what they're doing. On their existing enterprise
collaboration system. And other companies are starting
to use similar kinds of applications to encourage that kind
of lightweight knowledge sharing. There are a variety of
applications in human resources. Let me touch on a few of them,
really quickly. Companies are using gamification for
hiring. Just playing games sometimes
tells you something about people. And gamifying systems can be used to
identify the best candidates, and to review candidates
in the hiring process. Onboarding, gamification is
a way to get people up and running at a company early on. We talked about onboarding as
an important technique in game design. So if you think about your HR process
as a kind of game, gamification and game techniques can be used to
on board employees quickly. Beyond Onboarding is Acculturation, getting people engaged in
the culture of the enterprise. And games by creating a fun kind of
collaborative environment can help people get a sense of their co workers. And the notion of working
together as a team. And can be a way to reinforce
the culture of the organization. Now If the culture of
the organization is very formal and serious, then a game like system
may not be the best way to do it. But if not, or
in a wide variety of other contexts. A game like system may be a great
way to ease people into a sense of how we do things here and
what the nature is of our culture. Corporate training, easy way to see
that that applies to gamification. Using game mechanics to encourage
people and reward people. For the learning that they do
within the organization and various kinds of training programs. Performance review and
employee recognition. When we hear from Daniel Debow who I'll do
an interview with, later in the segment. His company uses gamification for
informal employee rewards. Telling people you did a great
job in the enterprise. And providing a structure
around that activity to have it redown down to the benefit of the company. We can also think of gamification
being used in the more structured, formal process of performance reviews. By expanding out to badges and
achievements and other forms of recognition. And by encouraging employees to contribute
to 360 reviews of their employees and co-workers. And finally, T and E, travel and entertainment,
here's an example from Google. For their travel and
entertainment reimbursements, they give people a fixed amount. That they can recover for a particular two-city travel pair
that they were traveling to. And then, what they do is they
create a virtual economy. So, if you don't use the full amount
you're granted, you can bank it. You can give it to charity or
you can cash it out, though at a discount. And this makes that kind
of credit liquid in a way, which encourages people to think
about creatively using it. To be more efficient about their use of
that travel and entertainment currency. Which previously employees didn't think
about as a currency or a game at all. They just thought about it as
a process of getting reimbursement. Here employees are encouraged
to think about. How to spend efficiently, because
then they bank additional currency. That they can use either for
themselves or for charitable donations. Next one is innovation. Companies want to encourage their
employees to come up with great, new ideas. So this is an example from the Department
of Work and Pensions in the UK. A public governmental organization, not necessarily the kind of organization
known for great innovation. What they've done is they've built
something called idea street which is an idea marketplace. So to encourage people within their
organization to come up with great ideas. To improve their service,
they created a virtual stock market. So, employees come up with ideas and
you can see some ideas here, and other employees can essentially
buy and sell shares in those ideas. There's a price, daily change,
volume, total market cap. And here's the link where you can buy and
sell it. And they've created a stock market
like market place around these ideas. So great ideas start to float to the top. People can join in on teams that
have ideas that they think are cool. And that are effective and that
encourages more activity on those ideas. And what they've found is they've
generated a large number of ideas. That have actually been put
into place in the organization, saving millions of dollars, or
millions of pounds there in the UK. And actually delivering better
service to their constituencies. Using these game mechanics to make the
process of coming up with innovative ideas more game-like, as opposed to just the
suggestion box that you drop an idea in. Finally, there are many examples of
serious games in the enterprise. So, here's an example from Siemens, the electronics and
telecommunications company. Where they have created
something called Plantville. Which is a simulation of one of
their manufacturing plants and they've created a game around
operating a manufacturing plant. So, this is something that can be used for
training, it's something that can be used for other
purposes, to help people understand how to be more effective in the process
of managing one of their plants. That is what I would call a serious game,
cuz it's a full-blown game. So, worth talking about in
this overall context, but worth Putting to the side for the moment. Because I wanna focus most specifically
on uses of game elements and structures that get incorporated
into existing businesses. So as we see, a wide variety of
different kinds of applications in different kinds of enterprises,
all using gamification.