# 8.2 Is Gamification Right for Me

How do you decide if gamification is right
for your organization, or the business problem, or other kind of
challenge that you have to address? There are four questions to ask, to
determine, if gamification is a good approach to
take. And these are, first of all, motivation. Gamification is about motivation, so, you
need to first say, would you derive value, from
encouraging certain behavior? If motivation matters to the business
problem, it's likely that gamification would be a good
approach. Second, is meaningful choices. Are the tasks involved, potentially,
sufficiently interesting? Meaningful choices is one definition of
the very nature of games. And it's implicit in many aspects of the
intrinsic motivation description, that I gave you
under self-determination theory. The notion of confidence and autonomy. Is basically the same as saying, the user
has to feel like there are choices, and those
choices are meaningful. Third is structure. And this basically says. Can we effectively gamify the system, by
using rules or algorithms? So, is this a problem, that will lend
itself to a digital system, which is what gamification typically is, that encodes
the basic rules for this problem set? If it's not, if it's something that's too
vague, or too subjective, or where the rules and objectives aren't sufficiently
clear, then gamification may not work. Even if this is a problem that. Would benefit from motivation, and that's
sufficiently interesting. And finally, potential conflicts. What other motivation structures, are
there in the organization? And will the gamified system potentially
come into tension with them? So, let's look at all four of those
questions in a little bit more detail. The first is motivation. So, what are the situations where
motivation is important? typically, two broad categories, which as
you see, are very different. The first is situations. That involve real deep creativity, or
situations that involve unique skills, and
connections, and teamwork. Situations where it's not just rote work. It's not necessarily something simple and
familiar. It's something complex and deep, that
requires people. To go the extra mile, and motivation is the secret ingredient that gets them to do
that. So, these are the high value add kinds of
tasks, the desire for innovation, the desire for more productivity, the desire for lasting
consumer engagement. The things that require more than just a
simple push of the button. The second broad category where motivation
is valuable though, is exactly that kind of situation, the situation where the task at hand, seems very dull, boring, and
repetitive. Because those are the kinds of tasks,
where if you can find some motivation. If you can find some meaning, and some
interest level in the task, and some challenge that motivates people, the
impact is quite significant. Because without those things, there's no
way except for the external, extrinsic kinds of approaches, to get
people involved in the task. And a wonderful example comes from the book Reamde, a recent science fiction
book. By Neal Stephenson. If you haven't read it, I'd encourage you to read the first 200 pages, they're
great. The next 800 pages, not so good. But it's a delightful book, like many of
his books, in terms of getting us to think about a potential future that
in many ways is already here. And the example for gamification is that,
one of the characters in the game, excuse me, in
the book, is the CEO of a massively multiplayer
online games company, vaguely like the company that
makes World of Warcraft. Only the business model for this game, is
using gamification. Specifically, the game applies itself,
generates revenue, by going to organizations that
have dull tasks. The first example that they give. Is airports dealing with security, and
having people having to sit there, and ensure no one walks in the wrong way, through the door that goes to the baggage claim area
because there has to be an opening going through
there and so therefore you have to check that to make sure people aren't coming
through the wrong way, because they don't go
through security. And so, someone has to sit there, but it's
the most boring thing in the world, to have to watch, person, after
person, after person, go out the door. On the off chance that some idiot will
wander in the other way by accident. Much more likely to be that idiot, than actual terrorist, but if that idiot gets
through, because the person sitting at the door fell
asleep, or wasn't paying attention in their mind
numbingly boring task. Then we've had lots of examples where
whole terminals have to get shut down, because someone is in
the terminal. Without having to go on through security
screening. So the idea in Reamde, is that this
company comes up with a great idea. They will use 3D motion capture, to
represent the people walking through the passageway in the terminal, as
creatures in the game. So, now there's a castle in the game, and people are walking down a certain
passageway in the castle. All in one direction. But the game says, in the game, that
there's a goblin trying to sneak in. And if you catch the goblin trying to
sneak in, you get a big reward. Lots of experience points for you in the
game. And the result is, lots of players in the game, sit there, and try to catch the
goblin. They try to find the goblin, even though
it involves the same thing. That the security guard had to do in the
airport. Sitting and watching person after person
going through the right way, in the hope that you might find someone going
through the wrong way. Putting it into the game, suddenly makes
that fun, and enga, engaging for people. And in the book, this becomes a huge
business opportunity for this company, because they're able to leverage
the engagement of the game players. To do tasks that otherwise would be
deathly boring. So, that's an example of one kind of task
that might lend itself to gamified motivation, that's very different from the
kinds of tasks that we might at first think of. Second question to decide whether
gamification is right for you. Is whether it involves meaningful choices. And here we can think about a number of
different kinds of situations that we talked about,
that make choices meaningful. Are there options for the user? Do they connect up with things that are
meaningful for the user? Does the gamified system. Do things in a way that seem interesting
where the user has to make choices, that they care
about the outcome. But there are many gamified systems out
there today, that don't seem to focus on this as much. Here is one example here, which is Google News Badges, which I believe I've already
mentioned. And Google News Badges gives you badges, just for, reading stories on a particular
area. There's no choice involved. Except for what stories you're reading. But that's not really a meaningful choice. Here you see that this person started
reading stories about Syria. And it says, keep reading about Syria and
you'll earn a bronze badge. But the question is, what's meaningful
about that? If you read a little bit about Syria, do
you want to start reading much about about Syria, to
become an expert on Syria? Or do you want to read some about Syria,
and then go read something about the Olympics, or some other topic, because
that's what a news site or a newspaper does. It's lets you find out about many
different things, as opposed to one thing to the exclusion of
all others. That's not really a meaningful choice,
deciding to write, to read a few more articles about
something. Just because you're going to get a badge. So, I don't want to cast aspersions at
Google News Badges. I'm not sure what the design criteria were for it, and what it's trying to
accomplish. But from a perspective of thinking about
whether this is a situation where gamific, gamification is, a logical
or natural solution, not so clear. Third one is structure, is about can we
use rules, algorithms, hard edge decisions, to implement a
gamified system? And so, here is the Samsung Nation site
that I've referred to a number of times. And you can see the points in the leader
boards, but the question is underlying that, what does it
take to get the points? What things are worth more? So two of the tasks that Samsung Nation
lets you address, are sharing things on Twitter, tweeting about something you've
done on the site, or, registering your product that
you've bought. Your Samsung product that you bought in a
real store. Do you go on the site and register it? Samsung Nation gives you 500 points, for
registering the product, and 100 points for tweeting about
something that you did on the site, now, I don't know again
from Samsung's business criteria, why they
picked one or the other. But the point is, a system that let's you make those choices and tradeoffs, in a
coherent way. Tends to be one that will lend itself well
towards gamification. Because you can build in, these different
kinds of motivators. And then, think about different ways to
encourage people. To choose between them, and to make their own tradeoff ,as to what's more meaningful
for them. Again, this ties back in to the notion of
meaningful choices. The points are just guides, and people in
playing, need to decide, how they personally value the activity,
vis-a-vis what the point system is telling them. And finally, conflicts. What other motivational structures are
there out there? So, this is particularly important, say,
in a company. There is a motivational structure for
employees. It's called their salary. It's called their desire not to get fired
from their job. That's not necessarily in conflict with
some system that says, go do this because it's fun. And because it's going to motivate you to
be part of a community, to have some
achievement or accomplishment. But there might be some tension, if those
things pull in opposite directions, or if the
user starts to wonder, well, should I be doing this for
the salary, or should I be doing this for the
fun? What's the tradeoff between the two? Another context for illustrative purposes
where this comes up a lot, is school. So, we have all kinds of motivators in school, including very extrinsic ones,
as well as increasingly intrinsic ones, trying to
get students to authentically care about and
enjoy learning. So, when gamification gets applied to
learning. It's very important to try to understand
the potential conflicts. So, this here is a gamified leaderboard,
or gamified experience point system, that was developed by Lee Sheldon, who is a professor at Rensselaer Polytechnic
Institute. He teaches game design, and he gamified
his courses. And this was the system that he used. For giving students points. Instead of saying, you get an A plus for a
perfect score, and then it goes down from there, A, B, C, D, F,
and the idea being you start at 100%, and every mistake you
get, you go down til you settle on your final grade, what Sheldon realized,
was that games don't work that way. Games work by building up. You start at zero experience points, and
grow, and grow, and grow, until you reach your final
level. So he said why don't we do school like
this? Why don't we say, you start here at zero? You start with an F, and based on what you
do, based on every assignment that you turn in, every achievement you get
within the course, you move up, and up, and up. Until you ultimately settle at your final
level, and that's your grade. Very cool idea, very powerful if designed
right, but it needs to be designed consciously, around
the existing sets of incentives. So, if this system were done in parallel
to traditional grading. That would cause some real tension, and
some real dissonance for the students. In Sheldon's classes he uses this as the
entire grading structure, but even so, it needs
to be designed in an effective way, that doesn't
create conflicts between different other kinds of
motivations that students might have. So, that's an example to illustrate, the
need to think about. Different tensions that might occur, among
different motivators. If you think about, all four of these
questions systematically, and come up with good
answers for them, you can be fairly confident that gamification
is a worthwhile approach to use, to tackle a particular, business
or other challenge.