# 5.4 Reward Structures

Gamification at least in it's more
behavioral manifestations tends to be very heavily about rewards. But there are lots
of different ways to do rewards. First of all, many different things can be
rewarded. So Four Square with its famous badges has rewards for all sorts of
things. Rewards for the first time that you check in, rewards for checking in ten,
25, 50 times. Rewards for checking in every day, rewards for showing up at a bar
a certain number of times. Rewards for being part of a swarm or a flash mob where
lots of people are checking in, in the same place and so on and so forth. So, the
first point is that creative and effective gamification designs will think pretty
expansively about what can be rewarded. What kinds of behavior does the designer
want to incentivize and what are different options. Again, the goal is to give users,
a.k.a. Players, a set of meaningful choices and a set of options that make the
game feel more engaging. The second aspect of rewards is that there are different
categories of rewards. And one typology of different kinds of rewards, not at all
limited to gamification, is what's called Cognitive Evaluation Theory. And this
comes from Richard Ryan and Ed Deci who we're going to meet in the next segment
when we start to talk about self determination theory. But one of the
things that they developed was a typology of different kinds of rewards that can be
used to motivate behavior. So the first category, the first distinction that they
highlight is between tangible rewards and intangible rewards. Physical things versus
things that are not real in any physical, tangible sense. So a badge is an
intangible reward. It's not something you can take with you. It's not something you
can hold in your hands. On the other hand, money is a tangible reward. But not all
tangible rewards are money. A Boy Scout badge, the sown on patch that goes on a
Boy Scout uniform, tangible reward. Lots and lots of kinds of rewards may not be
directly for money value. They may be of sentimental value or a sta tus value or
something to the person that receives them. That's still a tangible reward if
what they get is some physical thing. If what they get is, Good Job, that's a
verbal reward, that's intangible, and if they get something digital, that's also an
intangible reward. Second set of distinction for rewards, is between
expected rewards and unexpected rewards. Sometimes, we know the reward is coming,
if we do certain things. Sometimes the reward just happens. It's a surprise. And
our brains love surprises. We're going to talk about this more but we are hardwired
to seek out surprises, to find them interesting that dopamine, pleasure system
of the brain loves surprises. So, that means that an expected reward isn't, quite
so cool to the brain. But, most of the rewards that we tend to think about
specially in areas like gamification where the idea is designing for certain
behaviors, tend to be expected. They say, if you visit the site a certain number of
times and if you make x number of blog posts you will get this reward. And so you
as the player see that, and to the extent that the reward motivates you you're
responding to the expectation of getting the reward. So, distinction between those
kinds of rewards and ones that just come up by surprise. Even though they may be on
some defined schedule or algorithm by the designer, but to the player they are not
expected. Third, set of distinctions has to do with what the rewards are contingent
on. What is it that the player or other participant has to do to get their reward?
And here there are several different kinds of subcategories. The first subcategory is
if the reward is non-contingent, i.e., you get the reward no matter what. You don't
have to do anything, you just get the reward. That's the reward not being
contingent upon a task. Not something that we see too commonly in gamification and
not something that we see too commonly in general because then, what's the point if
you get the reward automatically? Second category is if the reward is contingent
upon en gagement. And engagement here means starting the task. So, if we want
someone to paint our house, we will give them the reward when they start painting
the house. Or if we want someone to do something on our website or check out our
product reviews, just starting it is what gives them the reward, whether it's a
badge or some amount of points, or even some money. Third category is completion
consistent, contingent. So, here it's not just starting it, it's actually finishing
it. You'll have to go all the way through and finish the task in order to get the
reward. Remember the mlb.com badges that popped up when you watched videos and
certain things happened, those were completion contingent. Remember that one
of the people who was talking about them on the blog site complained that his
coworker shut down the computer, and therefore he didn't get the rewards
because the rewards system was designed that you had to watch the entire video of
the game in order to be eligible for the badge. So that's an example of being
completion consistent, contingent instead of engagement contingent. And finally,
performance contingent. Both of these two, the engagement and the completion one,
require someone to do a task. But they make no assessment about how well the task
is done. Either you start it or you finish it, and that's enough. Performance
contingent says you have to do well somehow on the task in order to get the
reward. We are rewarding you for not just what you did, but for how you did it. So,
those are a spectrum of different kinds of rewards that can be offered. And for now,
let's just bracket the question of how effective those different kinds of rewards
are. But they're different kinds of rewards, all of which can be applied in
gamification. So let's look at a few different examples and see which category
they fit into. The, first couple come from the Samsung Nation site, that I've already
introduced you to. Here's a badge that you get, it's called the Cruise Badge, that
you get for ha nging out on the site. Certain amount of time you spend on the
site but basically, you show up to the site and as far as you're concerned you
just are there and this badge pops up after a certain amount of time. What kind
of reward is that? The Samsung Nation Cruise Badge is intangible, right? Just a
badge. Most of the examples we're going to see in gamification tend to be intangible
rewards, but not all as we'll get to. It's unexpected. It's something that just pops
up when you spend a little time on the site, presumably this is something that
Samsung puts in to give you a little surprise reward and get you engaged in the
whole badge structure that they are trying to use to drive behavior. And it's
engagement contingent. Now, at some level you might think this is completion
contingent because it requires you to spend certain amount of time, I'm guessing
it's ten minute based on the design of the badge. But from the user's perspective,
this is the badge you get just for hanging out there. It's basically a badge that you
get once you spend enough time to really be thought of as engaging and visiting the
site, and not just popping on there and popping off instantaneously. So I would
consider this an engagement-contingent reward. Something that you get
unexpectedly just for starting to spend time on the site. Here's another badge on
the same Samsung Nation website. This one is for hanging out a lot and it's
basically I think for 30 minutes of time on the site but this one is a quest. So,
this one's a little different. It's still intangible, but it's an expected reward.
You get this badge for doing something on a quest which defines a set of rules. The
quest says, if you spend 30 minutes you'll get this other badge. The notion of
course, being this other badge is cooler or there more badges than just spending
ten minutes on the site. But the fact that you know that you're going on a quest
turns it into an expected award. And it also makes it completion contingent. Now
that you know you'll have to spend 30 mi nutes to get the reward, you gotta spend
30 minutes to get the reward. It's not just something you get for embarking on
the quest. Now, many examples of rewards in gamification and otherwise are hybrids
of more than one of these categories. Here is one example from World of Warcraft.
This is an achievement that you get for various fishing prowess in the game. Yes,
if you haven't played W.O.W., fishing is actually a skill in the game. The reward
here you get is just a title. So, intangible reward. Just a, something that
goes in front of your character name. And there's all these sub components. And some
of them are things like, catch a 1,000 fish. That's completion contingent, pretty
clear. You catch one fish you don't get it. You catch 100 fish you don't get it.
You catch a 1,000 fish you get it. But some of them are different, some of them
are performance based and competitive. So, this one here, Master Angler, you only get
if you win a weekly fishing contest get the most fish or get certain special
reward fish in a defined contest. So, that one actually is not just completion
contingent, it's performance contingent, and so on and so forth. There's a mix of
different rewards here that are built in and, the point I just want to make here
is, there's a lot of complexity that can go into reward design. And in designing
gamification, the key is to think about the different possibilities, and come up
with the rewards that are most effective in motivating users but as we'll get to in
the subsequent unit, also ensuring that there is a truly meaningful and rewarding
and valuable experience for those players.