# 12.6 The Future of Gamification -- part 2

I hope you enjoyed the movie site. But more importantly, I hope it got you
thinking. I hope it made you ask some questions
about the nature of this process of gamification, and stimulated you to
envision where it might go. In the very first unit of the class, I
showed you a clip from Jesse Schell's DICE speech, which was also a vision of the future, in his case more optimistic,
although somewhat sarcastic. And both of them, I think, give you a
picture of both the potential of gamification and potentially really
positive things that it can do for business and for people. But they also get you to think about the
dark side. And it's important to keep both in mind,
but the reason to do this is definitely not to
scare you. The reason to do it is to make you ask a
set of questions and to realize that as
someone who now knows about gamification, and who may be involved
either directly or indirectly in deciding how it gets implemented in different
places, you can make some choices. You can choose whether the gamification
that you're doing is empowering. It helps people. It encourages them. It helps them find real meaning, and makes
their jobs or their lives, or their customer
experiences better. Or it can be manipulative. It can be something that takes advantage
of people, and can be counterproductive, or
even dangerous. You can also decide whether the gamification that you're involved in is
shallow, just slapping badges and points and so
forth on a process without really thinking through the opportunities, or if
it's deep and sophisticated, using all the different techniques and the different
learnings that I've shared with you in this class. You may remember, about halfway through I
gave you a chart showing two other different
choices that you have in gamfication: the more
behavioral approach versus the more cognitive or
game-based approach. These are not necessarily good and bad but
they are also a set of options that you have when doing
any gamified system. So all of these are forks in the road. And I don't want to tell you exactly what
to do, but I do want to communicate to you and to leave you with
the fact that the choice is up to you. The future of gamification will be made by all of you who've taken this course and
people who've taken other courses like it, and
people who've been involved in gamification
projects on the ground. Because gamification hasn't been around
all that long and there aren't that many people who have
the level of knowledge and expertise that you
now have from what we've done over the past six
weeks. Oh, one more thing, as you may recall,
there was a secret message that I said was running
through the videos. I explained the answer in one of my posts
on the announcement page, but for those of you who haven't
seen it, here's the solution. So, first let me tell you what the message
was. The message was in fact, For The Win. And the way that you got it was by
ignoring most of the things that were changing in the
background of the videos. There was one thing that changed in every
single video segment, not counting the interviews, in
what was behind me on the bookcases something would shift a
little bit in each video, but most of that was just for
fun. What mattered for the secret message was
that once in every unit there would be one or two
playing cards. And if you looked at the numbers on those playing cards, there's two of them here,
and added them up or took the number on one playing
card, you got a number which was a code. The code was a very simple code. One for the letter A, two for the letter
B, and so forth. And if you followed that code all the way
through from unit two through unit ten, you got the
message, For The Win. And that happens to be the title of the
book that I've co-written on gamification with
my colleague Dan Hunter. Now the point of the course is not to sell
you a book. Anyone who wants to can still sign up for
this course absolutely free. But I hope you'll excuse me if I encourage
those of you who are interested in finding out
more about gamification, if you want additional examples and
frameworks beyond the concepts provided in the course, to take a look at
the book. It's available online from the major
online retailers in paperback as well as all the leading ebook
platforms. And as you can see there on the slide,
lots of people including some you've heard from in the class, have
said nice thinks about it. Now who won the contest? Well, all of you won. This was not a contest focused on winning
and losing. It was a contest focused on the interest
and enjoyment of playing the game. Why did I do it? Well, as a number of you recognized in the
discussion board, it's an illustration of the themes that I've
talked about throughout the course. Adding a little bit of fun can make a
process more engaging. It can get people more focused, and it can
transform something that otherwise could be boring into something that feels just a
little bit more interesting and exciting. So this was a small example of
gamification, but hopefully one that, at least for some of you, made this class a
little bit more fun. All right, so we're at the end. Hard to believe that it's only been six
weeks, but I hope truly that all of you gotten
something out of this course. I's been an extraordinary experience for
me to put it together and to teach it, to hear from so many of you on the course forums, on Twitter, on the Facebook group, on
other mechanisms. I've certainly enjoyed it tremendously,
and I'm truly grateful for all of the attention and contributions that all
of you have made to the course. So, I hope that you've all taken something
useful away from it. Good luck. Go forth and gamify.