# 10.2 Social Good Applications

Let's look at some examples of
gamification for social good. They are in four categories. Health and wellness, energy and
environment, education, and government. These are, by no means, all of the
potential applications and, I'm only going to give you an example or two
in each category. As a way to get you thinking about the
potential in these areas, and the different kinds of
approaches that might be involved. The first example is something called
Zamzee, that comes from an organization called
Hope Labs, and Hope Labs is a nonprofit that uses games and game-like systems for better
health outcomes. So they do some wonderful work around, using serious games for cancer patient
recovery. But what I'm going to focus on now is
something that they may call the zamzee. And the zamzee is a little device that,
is, and accelerometer that keeps track of how active you are, how many steps you
take, when you walk up steps and so forth. And so it measures your physical fitness
activity, so therefore it's similar to the Niky Plus
system that I mentioned earlier and also to the Fit
Bit system that some of you may be familiar
with. But Zamzee is interesting because it's
targeted at low income teenagers. There is a terrible problem in the United
States about obesity and sedentary life styles among low income
communities and especially young people. So Zamzee is an attempt to focus in on
that problem, using this device and, it works the way you might expect, you get
your activity level tracked. And based on that, you earn points, and
you can unlock badges for various kinds of
achievements, you can level up, and you can win various kinds of awards or
earn various kinds of rewards based on your
points and so forth. Standard kind of set of game mechanics
that we've seen throughout the class. But what Hope Lash has been able to show
is that this device, which is designed in a way that's focused in,
again, on this particular communities, actually
produces real results. So they did a randomized study of 350
teenagers. In this community and found a 30% increase
in activity levels with the Zamzee. So, that's an example of something which
again the same basic device, the same basic
mechanics get used in commercial applications but it can
be targeted and focused in on achieving a
social benefit. We've seen several other health and wellness applications already in the
course. The KIA system for wellness activities by
people in enterprises. Photogracy to get people to work out and
go to the gym more. Here's another one though that's a little
bit different. This is something called Super Better
which, is, a product of Jane McGonagall's company which is also
called Super Better. And Super Better is about improving
people's life allowing people to overcome illnesses and to motivate themselves
around these kinds of health challenges using
gamification. So, she developed it after she had a
concussion. That's why her character you see here is
Jane the Concussion Slayer. And she created her own little game for
motivating her to engage with family and friends and to go through the various kinds of steps that she needed for
recovery. And super better is an attempt to
generalize that for all kinds of situations that
people have health problems that they are trying
to overcome or otherwise trying to improve
their situations. And it uses things like quests. Where you set mission for yourself. Or the game can set them for you. You have your allies, your community. Your power ups that you used to level, and
there even are the bad guys. Thing like, things like here caffeine and
flourescent lights and, running. I guess running in this case is a bad guy
if you have a concussion. So you can see this is a very game-like
kind of approach. As I may have mentioned earlier Jane McGonall doesn't like the concept of the
term of gamification and wants to focus more on
the truly game like side of the equation. If you recall the chart that I put up,
that there's a more behaviorist kind of gamification in
a more game based framework. She's more on the game side. And so this reflects that kind of framing. but, it has many of the same kinds of game elements that we've seen in other
contexts. just, structured, in a different way. And not using quite the same simplistic
kinds of point mechanics and reward mechanics that we see in some of
the shallow examples of gamification. But, again an example of trying to help people get better and do better using game
elements. Next category is energy and environment. First example here is O power and this is
a company that gives you reports on how much energy you use in your
house and what the patterns are. And you see trends and some part of it
here is just a quantification, a feedback mechanism
that lets you see how you're doing. And you can see here you're doing good in
this case. But it also, shows you a bunch of
relational data. So this says, you used less energy than
the average person, but 55% more than your
more efficient neighbors. Part of what's interesting about O Power
is that it creates a social dynamic a friendly kind of
competition with your friends. So for example here's a report showing a
comparison with your neighbors where you see you and
the bar chart shows what all of your neighbors
are doing so you can see the worse of them. The norm among your neighbors, but, really
worse off than the category of more efficient
neighbors. And what they've been able to show, and
researchers have been able to show in other contexts, is that,
that social dimension. That, peer pressure, if you will, is
really powerful in getting people to, engage in new behaviors, like
using lec, less electricity. And here we see the goals which is a
similar kind of structure that we've seen in other
gamified contexts. And the leader board, another way to
compare yourself against your friends. O power has been able to show roughly a 2
to 4% improvement in the communities where it
operates in energy utilization. May not sound like much, but that's enough
to drive hundreds of millions of kilowatt
hours of energy savings. We are talking about people who use a lot
of energy, and potentially millions and millions of
people in cities, that can have this effect. So even a small sustained impact on energy
usage is a huge benefit for the energy companies, in terms of pollution, in terms
of energy sustainability and so forth. Next example is Recycle Bank. Recycle Bank has a gameified system of
rewards and points and so forth. For encouraging people to recycle. So they partner with local communities
that have recycling programs and say if you or if you recycle in this
program you earn the points which you can then redeem for
rewards and, and they got a bunch of partnerships with
retailers to redeem the reward. Standard straightforward kind of gamified
system, which they've been able to use in a large number of communities to
encourage recycling behavior. Again, this is a perfect example that this
basic structure could be about anything. Could be about something that's commercial
but it's using those techniques to help improve recycling and create all
those sorts of benefits. Education is in many ways right for
gamification. Student motivation is a huge challenge,
and we already have scoring systems, and reward systems, and
credentialing systems, and so forth. The challenge is, for gamification to make
the system better and not worse. Because to the extent that the game
elements push students to focus just on those
rewards. And just on what it takes to optimize on
the game. And that's different from the true
authentic, intrinsically motivating learning that they should be
engaged in. The gamification system like a lot of
educational reform efforts might actually harm the
educational process rather than help. So that's an important carrier, but there
still are ways that gamification, if designed right can be used in many
positive ways in education. And there are range of different
experiments and initiatives going on. One interesting one is something called
quest to learn which is an entire school. There's now one in New York and Chicago
built around games and game structures as the entire
foundation of the curriculum. It's being led by Katie Salen who's a noted game designer, and game theorist,
and games educator. So that's one dimension. Two more dimensions to mention quickly
which I've already talked about in the class, one is incorporating games
structures into an existing curriculum. Lee Sheldon I mentioned earlier, he was
the one who developed the system in his courses at University of
Indiana, and [UNKNOWN] Polytechnic. That had the insight that normally you
start with an A and then depending on what you do,
how you screw up, the mistakes you make, you
move down towards an F and you settle wherever
you are. Let's say you get a B here. Whereas Sheldon said, well in a game you
start at zero points as a newbie and you work your
way up. And so maybe we should do the system that
way and see how far you get and call this an A minus or
something like that. So that was one of the game structures that he and others have put into their
classes. But there's a lot more that can be done
and in fact that people are doing, including
using quests and challenges. And, achievement structures and game
narratives all in the service of better pedagogy and better
learning and Lee Sheldon has a whole book out called The Multiplayer Classroom which I
commend you. It talks in great detail, but what he has
done, but also give a variety of examples and case studies of
both K 12 and higher education teachers. That are applying gamification and game
structures in really interesting ways. Another dimension of education is the
credentialing function. The way that education says, yes we can
confirm you have these skills. Which then is useful for an employer or
other kinds of organizations that want to know
what you've learned. Traditionally we do this by giving you a
diploma or some sort of standardized test, but both
of those have limitations. And they're especially limited outside of
the traditional formal educational system. So I mentioned earlier the open badge framework that the Mozilla Foundation is
spearheading. There's also a large contest that some foundations are funding for
interesting applications. And again, this is a way to use the game
elements of badges as a way of showcasing and confirming. Certain skills and accomplishments,
wherever they come from, and allowing students to take those and use them in
different places. So two dimensions of education which gamification can potentially offer some
solutions. Final category to look at is government. Government? How can government use gamification? Well, several ways. First of all, government can act as an
enterprise. A government agency like the U.S. Department of Agriculture has thousands of
workers. And so enterprise gamification makes sense
for them just like any other enterprise. Secondly, government in many ways
interacts with citizens. It provides customer service. Anything from voting to getting a driver's
license at the DMV, to applying for some sort of license
or anything else. And there may be activities that
government is doing to engage with the public where gamification could have some of the same external benefits that we've seen in other
areas. But the third broad area is that
government can use gamification and games to promote its policies and to
promote benefits for the citizenry of the country or the other
domain that the government oversees. And interestingly, in the United States. The White House has brought in a woman named Constance Steincooler,
Esquire, who's a very well known professor, focused on
games and education at the University of
Wisconsin. In 2011 she took a, an 18-month leave of
absence to go work as a policy adviser in the office of science
and technology policy at the White House. Spearheading a project, bringing together
work at different government agencies, looking
at how games and game elements can promote
policy goals of the government. And here's a post that she made on the
White House blog, talking about some of the things that she's doing, and talking
about a meeting that was held in late 2011. In, involving 23 government agencies in
the United States. Including the army, the park service, The
National Endowment for the Arts, NASA, Department
of Energy, all of which are doing interesting
experiments using games and game elements to promote their
agenda. So, that's just a taste of some of the ways that gamification can be a tool for
social good.