# 5.5 Reward Schedules

Reward Schedules refers to when the reward
is offered, as opposed to what it is, or what it's based
on. And the behavioral studies suggests that,
the structure of the reward schedules actually has significant implications for
the psychological reaction that their rewards
produce. There are several different possible
rewards schedules, here are some of the major ones. The first one is the Continuous reward. So, if we look at time here on the x axis and the activity that the player or person
is engaging in, a continuous reward says, guess what, you
get a reward each time, the reward is automatic it goes for every
incidence of the action. The second kind of reward is a Fixed Ratio
reward. Fixed Ratio says, if let's say, that the activity happens a certain number of
times. Here I'm putting down the times that
someone does something, and that might be visiting your website or
that might be pushing a lever in some of these
behavioral studies, or it might be something involved in
playing a game. But, let's assume that there's this
certain level of actions. Fixed ratio says, every n number of times
you get the reward. So let's say, the fixed ratio is every
other time you get the reward; that would mean
you get a reward the first time, the third time,
the fifth time, the seventh time, the ninth time,
and so forth. That's a fixed ration reward. The third category is a Fixed Interval
reward, and here the reward is fixed not based on the amount that the person engaged in the activity, but based on
time. So let's say, the fixed interval said the
reward comes every three units of time. We look here, one, two, three. That means the reward comes right here. The reward then comes one, two, three
units later. One, two, three units after that. One, two, three units after that. So you see here, sometimes, as in this
case right here. The reward hit right on a time when the
user was engaging in the action. But some other times it didn't. Here the reward was given right here. And the action was much earlier. That's the point of the Fixed Interval
reward. It's based on time, not based on what the
user does. But it's still fixed in some way. It's still a regular pattern when the
reward happens. And then, the final category of rewards
are Variable rewards. The reward is on no fix schedule. And essentially, when we think about the
gamification this first one here, the Continuous reward is really
of the least interest. The idea that you'll get a reward every
time, tends to not feel like a reward. It make sense, at some point that's not going to motivate people when it's just
something automatic. It's not really a reward band, it's just
noticing as your plan. The kind of fixed rewards, ratio and
interval have some psychological value. But, as we'll see the brain picks up on
the pattern. And that tends to ultimately dull the
psychological impact of the reward although, it makes
those things easier to do in gamification because those
are the classic examples of badges and
questions so forth. Where there's some defined set of
processes or some defined set of time as we saw on Samsung Nation, that
then unlocks the reward. The final one is probably the most
interesting, this is the Variable reward. And as I said, our brains love surprises. This probably comes from evolution. Our brains are evolved basically to be
hunter-gatherer species. And surprise. Something that's different, unexpected out
of place with the terrain is really
interesting. And it's really interesting partly
because, if you're a neolithic hunter gatherer it might be something like a big wild animal
that's going to eat you. So, our brains are really good at picking out, for example, movement on a solid
field. And our brains are really good at
encouraging us to take a closer look at things that are somehow different, and something that is not according to a
pattern. Something that seems to come up randomly,
fits into that category of surprise. So just based on the way our brains have
been evolved, we tend to respond powerfully to unexpected and to variable schedule
rewards. So then let's look at some examples of gamification rewards and how they fit on
this structure. The Samsung Nation hang out quest that I
showed you, the one that was completion contingent expected reward is also a fixed
interval reward because it's about time. It's about a certain amount of time that
has to pass before you get the reward and so we call
that Fixed Interval. What about this one? Here's another quest that you can go on,
on Samsung Nation. And this one is based not on time, but the number of visits that you make to the
site. You have to visit the site so many times
to unlock this badge. What category does that fit under? That badge in Samsung Nation is a fixed
ratio badge, because it happens every certain
number of times. That you go to the site as opposed to
being based on time. Variable rewards, as I said are in many ways, the most interesting kind of reward
schedule. But there are different ways that Variable
rewards can be variable. One dimension, as I said, is just
surprise. You're not expecting them so therefore,
they feel like they are variable because you don't know
they are coming. A second dimension is whether or not they
are Competitive. So if the reward is based on you winning
some contest, you have to have the most points on the leader
board, or you have to beat someone head to head in some kind of ritual duel
in order to get the reward, well then it's necessarily
variable, it's based on your activity, based on
competition. And there are many different ways to
structure Competitive rewards. Maybe you're competing in a zero sum game,
one person wins, one person loses. Maybe you're just competing to overcome a certain threshold that other people have
set. So there are different ways to make
rewards competitive. The second dimension that can make rewards
variable, is how certain the reward is. If you know absolutely, that a reward is
contingent upon something, then the reward maybe variable in terms of
how much that activity takes place. But, it's variable, it's not variable in
the sense that you are certain once the trigger happens,
the reward will follow. But the alternate circumstance is where
there's some randomness involved. There's some level of chance. And you're not certain that you're going
to get the reward even if you engage in the
triggering activity. So once again, the MLB.com badges, as I talked about those occurred, not just when
you watched the streaming video, but when
something happened to the player that was designated in that
game. So there's some randomness involved. It's not a certainty that if you watch the video, that you're going to get the
reward. And all this ties back to the fact that
again, our brains love that sense of surprise and they love those
variable schedule rewards. So the uncertainty turns something, that would otherwise be a fairly fixed
schedule. Watch the video. Completion and contingent. Complete the video. Get the reward. It turns it into a more of Variable reward
which is part of what makes it more interesting
to people. Now, variables rewards we see in lots of
situations and probably the most powerful example of a variable reward machine is
this thing, the one arm bandit. The slot machine. It's about tangible rewards. Those gold coins you get there. But, what makes he slot machine work. What makes the slot machine addictive to
people, is the variable reward schedule. You never know when a reward is going to
come up, and a good slot machine, or at least, an effective slot machine for the casino owner is
tuned. So that the reward is variable. It's random. You can't be certain exactly when it's
going to happen. But the reward comes just enough, so that
you don't give up. You play, and play, and play. And most of the times, you pull the big
handle and nothing happens. But then just before you're going to give
up, you get something. You get a little jackpot. And every once in a while someone in the
casino gets a big jackpot. So the idea is, it's a variable schedule,
a random uncertain reward. But it's tuned so that it happens
frequently enough, so that the person who's playing holds out
that hope. If I just pull the handle a few more
times, put in a few more coins. Then I'm going to hit the jackpot, and
that's the essence of what makes slot machines, for at least
some people really addicting. Now, I will emphasize, as I have before,
that this is not entirely a good thing. Addicting people is something that is
dangerous and potentially harmful to them. And while we throw around sometimes in
gamification and marketing things like we want to get our customers
addicted, it's important to distinguish that from truly getting
them to the point where they don't know what they're doing and
can't make good judgments. And as we'll see, as we get into the next
section. There's some real danger of going down
this behavioral path of focusing entirely on how people respond to stimuli that we
put in front of them.