# 9.3 The Game vs. The Job

There is an interesting and important
distinction that comes up in enterprise gameification,
which is the dividing line between the game on one side, and the
job on the other. Why is this important? Well it's important for a number of
reasons, but the core is that if you're designing a gamified system in the
enterprise, what you care about is ultimately the job. The goal is to motivate employees to do
something that's business benefit. The game is a means to that end, but for
the players, for the employees, they may well
be focused on the game. The game is the thing that engages them,
and to the extent that there's a divergence, to the extent that
the game is pushing them one way. And the job is pushing them another way. That leads to real problems, because again
the players have a strong tendency to go in the direction that the game pushes them as opposed to what their job really should be
about. So think about ,as an example, a call
center. And the call center sets up a game, or a
gamified system using points and badges and leaderboards, and so
forth as we've, as we've seen. And then sets the rules of the game with
something like, if you get done with a call complete a call in less than 30 seconds you get ten
points. And, if you complete more than a certain
number of calls in, an hour. You get 50 points and so on and so forth,
and all of the structures in the game are around the volume and the speed of the
calls, what are people going to do? The call center agents are going to try to
get customers off the phone as fast as they
possibly can. Not to provide good service to them, but
just to get them off the phone to optimize against
the game. On the other hand, if you have the same
gamified structure, but the points are for things like good customer satisfaction. So, the customer says that you did a great
job, when they get surveyed afterwards, you get 100 points
for that, and that's what the game rewards. Or you get a bonus reward if you get a
streak of customer sat, you got above a certain
level on customer satisfaction. Five calls in a row, you get 500 bonus
points. Then the game is encouraging people to
optimize on satisfaction. Now, we still don't know in this very
general hypothetical. Whether this matches up perfectly, with
the job requirements. So, certainly if the system is designed
just to create call center agents who want to get
customers off the phone as fast as possible at any cost,
that's not likely to be something that companies are
going to want. At least companies that are thoughtful. Their long term interests and their
customer perceptions but the question about how important it is to
optimize on customer satisfaction versus something else, is a
business decision that the company ultimately that is the customer of
the call center. Or the company operating the call center
needs to figure out. And then, the structures of the gamified
system have to be designed to motivate towards those
business goals. So, this ties back into the element of the
design framework that I gave you earlier on, to first figure out what the business goals are, and then go through the
gamification process. It's always important to focus on the job,
or the task at hand, because otherwise, people will
optimize themselves on the game. The second dimension here is that
sometimes people are motivated at work for things outside the job in a
good way. And that refers to corporate citizenshi-,
citizenship behaviors, situations where people will do
things at work just to be nice to colleagues, or
to be good for the company. So, some of the ones that get mentioned
here, altruism, people will do things just to be good to
other people. Conscientiousness, people will work hard
and want to do a good job, just because they take pride in
what they do. Civic virtue, a sense that you are part of a larger community, and you care about
doing your part for the community even though it's a
business community where you work as opposed to a social community
at home. Common courtesy and sportsmanship, being
fair to others, these are normal human motivations and they're true for
people at work as well. And they can be tapped into for the benefit of the company in various examples
using gamification. The one that I gave you before was the Microsoft Language Quality game, which
tapped into people's desire to make Windows a better
product by volunteering their time to find
localization bugs. Ross Smith, who is the head of the test group at Microsoft, that implemented the
Language Quality game and several other productivity games, has
developed a framework to understand which applications lend
themselves well to this approach. And his structure involves, two different
kinds of behavior or tasks and three different
kinds of skills. So the two kinds of behavior are, first,
what he calls in-role behavior, ie what you're doing for your job, it's something that's part of your normal job
description. And then citizenship behaviors things that
you do at work to be a good employee a good citizen of the organization not
necessarily these specific things that you are hired to do or compensated
for. And then he talks about three different
categories of skills, one set are what he calls core
skills. Which are skills that everyone in the
organization has. The next are unique skills. Skills that are limited to a particular
employee or a group of employees and, next future
skills. Skills that an employee would like to
obtain. And Smith says these productivity games,
things like the language quality game, designed
to improve productivity in the workplace are best
used in just two of the sections of this chart. The first one is for, core roles that
involve citizenship behavior, or core skills I should say that
involve citizenship behavior. And this is where the language quality
game fits. So this is a skill that everyone in the company has, the skill is speaking your
own language. It doesn't require anything. Unique to you, any particular training. Anyone who is a native speaker of the language where the office is, can easily
review dialogue boxes in their native language,
and they're going to do it, not because it's their
job. But, because it's part of being a good
corporate citizen. So, the fact that the language quality
game is down here, and not an in-role kind of task is what
enables it. Because if it's a core skill and it's an
in-role kind of task then there's not as good a fit for something that is
designed to be fun and game like. The only reason to motivate you to do
something that everyone in the company can do, is if it's part of
this collaborative activity. The other category where he says,
gamification, or productivity games work well, is up here so it's in-roll, it's your actual job responsibilities, but it's about
future skills. It's about things that you want to learn
how to do. That's where gamefication and productivity
games can help in terms of training, and improving
people's behavior. Really what I think Smith is getting at
here, is that there are two big categories of gamefication application in the work
place. One involves groups it involves community. Trying to get participation from as many people as possible within the
organization. The other involves individuals. And typically involves improving their
skills, or improving their performance at work. Those are very different, and one is
better done in a, an example that's focused on. Actual job responsibilities, and one is
better done outside of that environment. If, it, in the situation, though, involves unique skills, people's unique
capabilities but it's skills they already have, a game-like
structure may not be as effective. Because it doesn't create a level playing
field for people to interact on. If it's not about training and problem
solving just showing what you can do, then there is not really an environment for a game or the proper application of
gamification. So, all of this goes to emphasize the
point hat enterprise gamification requires a
close attention to the nature of the game, and how that matches up with the different sorts of objectives and
motivations in the workplace.