# 8.3 Design for Collective Good

If you've decided that gamification is a good approach to use for your business
challenge, how do you ensure that you're doing it in a thoughtful, deep, substantive,
meaningful way? The best way I can think of to illustrate
this is to give you a detailed example of a service that uses all of the
standard PBL-type game elements, but pulls them together in
a coherent and consistent way to address some of the deeper aspects of game design
and psychology and ultimately, meaning. The site is called Stack Overflow. It's part of a larger group of sites now
called Stack Exchange. And I'm going to intersperse screenshots
of the site with some quotes from Jeff Atwood, who's one of the
founders of the site, from a blog post that he put out trying to
explain how and why he and his co-founder made design
decisions to implement gamification. Now an important point he makes is that
when the site was set up, he had no idea what
gamification was. And all these decisions were not made
based on gamification being an interesting or
cool design practice. They were ways that he and his co-founder
tried to solve the challenges that they had in
front of them, which just happened to be the
kinds of things that we now think about as
gamification. So Stack Overflow is a site for
programmers. It's a question and answer site where you
can go to ask questions about how to write software or problems that you're having
with certain kinds of coding, and other people answer
the questions. Well, that doesn't seem terribly
interesting, does it? Asking and answering questions about
coding. In particular, how do you get people to
spend their own volunteer time answering other people's questions, answering
questions from total strangers about how to code certain
things? Well, it turns out that Stack Overflow has been tremendously successful at this
very task. The site, or the collection of sites now
that they've put together, have over two
million registered users. They average over 5,000 new questions per
day, and over 10,000 new answers per day on the
site. So they've been able to motivate people to
engage in this practice and the question is how they have been
able to do that. Well, the first reason is by thinking
about the problem in the right way. What is programming? Well you can look as programming as the
example of something very dull and rote. You can look at answering questions about programming as something inherently boring
and difficult. Or you can look at it as something cool
and wonderful and magical and game-like, and that's the approach
that the designers of the site took. So Atwood says, the field of programming is almost by definition one of constant
learning. Learning, as we talked about, has a great
affinity for games. And he said, programming is supposed to be
fun. Says who? Well, says them and obviously says a lot
of other programmers. And to the extent that you can take this
approach and think of what you're doing as fun, then it
naturally leads towards a gamified approach that's authentic, that's
not just based on how do we make people do this thing which otherwise
they wouldn't want to do? How do we come up with a whole bunch of rewards that we'll dangle in front of
people, a bunch of big carrots or a bunch of big
sticks that will get them to do the thing? This approach says well, how do we think
about the problem in a way that makes the people feel like they
want to do it themselves? If it is fun, if you can find the fun in
any problem, as Mary Poppins says then snap, it becomes a game and people
will want to do it voluntarily. So that's the first aspect of what they've
done. Second aspect of what they've done is to implement a system that is reflective of
their community. Know your players. Understand what the community is that's
involved in the activity. And this is particularly important because meaning is socially constructed in
communities. What's meaningful, what's important is not
the same from every community to every other
community. It depends on the norms of those groups
and communities, and the kind of activity
they're involved in. So take Foursquare's badges which we've
seen before. Very colorful, very fun if you will,
creative, graphical, lots of little inside jokes
here and, things like a pumpkin and so forth, These are badges that are designed to be cool in
their own right which is part of the whole FourSquare
mantra when they implemented these gamified elements, to get people to think
that checking in was somehow something fun that they'd
want to do. The badges in Stack Overflow look quite
different. So here's a profile page of a user. This happens to be a very high level user,
in fact he's one of the moderators who have the extreme
privilege of helping to run the whole site. He's got 88,000 reputation points, which
is an awful lot. And here are his badges, just that, 52 gold badges, 224 silver badges, 434 bronze
badges. So you notice a very different aesthetic
here. This is a site for programmers, for geeks, so it's about lots of numbers, lots of
information and not lots of visual clutter, but just get to the heart of the information right
away. Gold, silver, bronze, what those badges
are and what they mean so at a glance you can see what this person's
reputation score looks like. So two different ways to do badges. Each one is appropriate for the situation
at hand. So this is an example of a Stack Overflow
set of question and answers. There was a question above and here's an answer from someone talking about how to
do something. And here's the person who gave the answer,
this user Babu and you can see this person has 204 points and nine bronze
badges, a pretty low-level user. And then here someone else has come in,
this other user, and that person has edited the
answer. And you see this person is a much higher
level user. They've gotten 9,000 points, and a bunch
of gold badges and so forth, not quite at the
level of Bill the Lizard, but they're a much higher
level user, and they have voluntarily edited the
other person's post. So not only did that person voluntarily
come up with an answer, they voluntarily modified and
improved upon someone else's answer. You see here there's a link to improve the
answer. Well, that's really great. If the system not only gets people to come
up with their own answers, but to improve the answers are there, it's a self-reinforcing, self
improving system. And here you see another example of an
answer that was done by this person, and then
down below some dialogue back and forth by the
person doing the answer and the person posting
the question. Again more information. The question gets more precise, the answer
gets more precise. More activity actually improves the
system. So that's a really great process. If you can design a system that has those
characteristics it will be very powerful. And the question is then, so how does
gamification do that for Stack Overflow? Back to Atwood again. Stack Overflow, he says, is many ways my
personal Counter-Strike. Now Counter-Strike is a game, it was a
modification of a game called Half Life, which is an
interesting story in its own right, but the cool thing about
Counter-Strike was that it was structured around groups coming together
and having to fight as a team. Counter-Strike is a game where you're a commando unit that's fighting against
terrorists. It's all about shooting at things using
various different weapons. But in Counter-Strike if you go off on your own you're almost certainly going to
die. You need to group up with a bunch of other
people and some of them will cover you as you move forward, and
will take out snipers and so forth. You have to work together as a team. And that activity was what made
Counter-Strike really interesting and challenging for a lot of
gamers. Because it's harder to group up with
people and all work together as a team then just to go off on
your own. And Counter-Strike implemented this in a
really interesting and compelling way, so it was an extremely
successful game. And what Atwood says is that notion of
working together as a team, that to win the game you have to be
effective, not just yourself, but as a teammate, as a part of a larger whole
was the lesson that he and his co-founder took to apply to question and
answers for programming. So the idea is helping fellow programmers
is the way that you win at the game. You don't win by being awesome by
yourself, you win by helping other people. So the gamified system is structured in
Stack Overflow, relentlessly to incentivize pro-social behavior, to
incentivize things like as we saw, improving on other people's answers as
opposed to just doing stuff purely yourself in a way that
doesn't help the group. So let's look very quickly at some of the ways that Stack Overflow structures its
game elements to produce that same Counter-Strike-like
result where people are encouraged to work together in order to win in the
game. The first is that the points in the system
are actually called reputation. And the primary way you get points is when
your fellow users vote up your questions and answers, so not for your actions, but for other people saying you did a good
job. That's the core definition of reputation
in the system. You have to do something other people
think highly of in order to get points. Similarly, there's this structure in Stack
Overflow called bounties, where you can give
reputation to someone for coming up with an answer,
or a good answer to a question. That creates this notion of exchange, and
gifting, which is another very powerful pro-social norm that gets
activated by this game mechanic. So all of these game mechanics around the
point system are structured to reward, not individual achievement, but
things that serve the collective good. And Atwood talks about this as encouraging
groups to do what's best for the world rather than their own
specific, selfish needs. Here he alludes to a wonderful article by Clay Shurkey, called A Group Is Its Own
Worst Enemy, where Shurkey points out that
there's this real problem online, that we have really easy
group formation. You can form a group for anything online,
but the group tends to fall apart because the
group may have some set of goals, there may be some set
of things that we can agree is in the group's
interest. But all the people who participate in the
group aren't the group, they're individuals and so they
pull in their own direction. And the group, as it grows, tends to fall apart and disintegrate because it doesn't
have hierarchy and structure. The lack of hierarchy and structure is
what's great about online activities and online groups,
but they cause attention. And Atwood's claim here is that game
elements in Stack Overflow are what pull against that natural tendencies of groups
to collapse into selfish interests. So, for example, the reputation gives you
certain powers, but they are not just powers to go off on to different
parts of the site, and lord over people. They are powers that give you abilities to
be essentially a moderator of the site, to engage in more of this
beneficial behavior on the site. And that's cool, that's something you get
with reputation, but it's also something that
helps others. Similarly Stack Overflow has a badge
system. But again it's not the FourSquare type of
badge system where the badges are about showing off your big cabinet with
all of your cool badges in them. The badges are about doing things. Some of them are just things that are good for the site, visit every section of the
FAQ. But some of them are about things that are good for others, edit 100 posts that have
been inactive, actively, oh, that's not really
one, but here, vote 300 times, leave ten comments, and so
forth. All social behavior. And this is especially true of the gold
badges, the really cool badges that people are
going to want. There you have to do things like edit 500
posts. Remember, editing a post is the thing
that's most beneficial in terms of improving the quality of the
site collectively, but the thing that people are least likely to
do on their own, so use a badge to encourage people to
do it. similarly, great answers get you a gold
badge, but so do great questions and so do questions that are famous, that
are viewed by lots of people. So all of these are different ways of
incentivizing the very things that are in the interest of
the site, in the interest of the group as opposed to
just incentivizing the things that may make
people feel individually cool. And Atwood ultimately talks about this as
the game elements being in service of a higher
purpose. He said it ultimately helps him become
more knowledgable and a better communicator while improving the
very fabric of the web for everyone. Now, not every gamified site can credibly
claim to improve the fabric of the web for
everyone. If it's purely a marketing site that's
trying to get more customers engaged, it's hard to see this as something that is fundamentally making the internet a
better place. It's not necessarily in conflict with it,
but as long as you can push in that direction, try to find things that are
meaningful and fun for people, but also try to find ways to have the gamification elements push towards
cooperation, collaboration and larger good, larger purpose, that notion of
relatedness in self determination theory, the more
likely it is that the gamified site will be deep and
significant and enduring.