# 10.5 Susan Hunt Stevens Interview

So let's talk to someone who is actually
putting to work these ideas about using
gamification for social good. Susan Hunt Stevens is the founder of a
site called Practically Green which I'll let her talk about and she's also a long time technology industry executive
and entrepreneur. Most recently before this she was the
general manager of Boston.com which is part of the New York
Times company. And I sat down with Susan to try to get a
perspective on the ground about what it's like trying to motivate people to
engage in sustainability activities employing
gamification as a key technique. Susan, thanks very much for joining us. >> Oh, it's great to be here. Thanks for having me. >> Tell me a little bit about, the company
that you run, Practically Green and how you use gamification to address,
social impact kinds of problems. >> Sure, well the first thing is Factor game was founded with the mission helping
motivate inspire people to embrace healthier and
more sustainable choices at work, at home, and in the
community. But what our secret sauce is essentially,
is we're bringing the best of interactive
technology to make this happen. Because it can do some things, that frankly, are almost impossible to do
offline. Part of that is the power of bringing
transparency to the social norms of what's happening in
a community. So that if you and I are friends or
colleagues we can see what each other is doing and by that either compete, collaborate, learn,
share, and if nothing else pat each other on the back for getting
something accomplished. But the game elements are really the
foundation for creating a scale. Because, if you think about
sustainability, there is no scale to step on and say, how green am I? You know, how environmentally healthy am
I? And so we really approached it as how do we help people understand where they are
on their journey. Are they just getting started at level
one, or are they halfway through and they've really
made some good progress but they're still around level five or six, or
are they just killing it, you know, and they're
level nine or ten. And so, to create a leveling system,
that's the foundation of a game. The second thing is how do you figure out
what to do and how is it going to help you
improve? Well that we've created a point system. It's based on science and life cycle assessment data and some art thrown in
because we are all still learning what things
impact in terms of energy, health, water, and
stuff. But we use the point system to help people
move up the level as well, that's a game
element again. And then the last piece of it that we had
to add in is if you think about healthy and
sustainable living. Many of the benefits you are not going to
see in your wallet or in, you know Avoiding something really
bad from a house standpoint. So how do you give people recognition, a
sense of celebration, a sense of accomplishment, when they've
done something that really is impactful in their real life, and so we used
elements from games, challenges, badges you know pats on the back,
etcetera, to make that happen. And so, you know, as I stand back now two
and a half years later I will be the first to say that I did not going to this saying lets use gamification, to inspire
real life behavior change. I really said how do we inspire people to
understand where they are, and to move up, and to feel good when they
make decisions around this. But the more we started to build it, the
more we realized this has so many game elements in it that it
also makes it fun. And I think that's a big piece is nobody
put fun and sustainability in the same
sentence before for around change. It was sacrifice and preaching us and all
of these things by bringing fun into this process of
learning, engaging, and acting. We're getting a lot more people to
participate and particularly a lot more people who would never say I'm a
green person. You know? They're just like. >> So what does it take to, make people
engage in those long term changes to make these practice really become a habit or
something that they just do automatically. >> Well I think that's one of the places
where I think it's important to really distinguish between games and
gamification. Because the one thing about games, and you
know, there are games that people have played for lifetimes, Worlds Warcraft, things like
that. But most games have a shelf life of 12 to
18 months, you know, and there's sort of a
start and there's kind of a finish, and it isn't an effect that
goes on and on and on over worlds and lives and
things like that. And I think one thing about about the sort
of habits and behaviors that impact your life
is that you end up being life long games, or at least
large segments of lifelong games, five, ten
years and things like that. I think you have to design something very differently when you're thinking about
long term play versus getting 10 million people for 18
months on and then moving into to the next game. We really have to think about how do we
drive long term engagement, how do we keep people motivated and inspired, how do we
use contents, in some ways, in addition to
game elements. But in particular, it's the community. And that's the thing I think sometimes,
when we talk about gamification we maybe don't spend
enough time on, which is really understanding that 80% of people
are participating for the social benefits of being part of the community
that's doing something together. And that's true whether it's a process of
embracing health and sustainability or you know a fitness club
or you know a long extended multiplayer game like, like World
of Warcraft is the people you're playing with that keep you there
and keep you coming back. And so one of the things that we really
probably spend as much time if not way more time emphasizing is
how are we building that community. How are we creating community, how are
letting people interact with each other, motivate, inspire each
other and challenge each other. Versus the framework or the elements, the
points you know the PDL's etc that your using to make that
happen. I'm assuming your books going to be read. So I can say PDLs and people know what I
mean. [LAUGH]. >> Well certainly hope people read the
book when it comes out. Is there anything different about that
kind of community building exercise that you're talking about in this context
related to the game mechanics than in other kinds of online contests, because
I know you have a lot of experience with social media and,
and online media more broadly. >> Yeah, it is different. So there's sort of two pieces of it. One is that, because it's personal
information. There is a lot more comfort with trusted
groups versus groups of strangers. That is not say that's completely true. There are people who don't have people in
their networks who are embracing health and sustainability so they come to
Practicallygreen.com to find other people making these changes
and connect with them because they're lonely, frankly in
real life, doing these things. But in general it's much more impactful to
put a program like this into a community that already exists, and to then bring transparency to the social
norms. And then get the community that already
exists, the workplace, the mother's forum, the green
team, you know, etc. Acting together in this framework because
now they at least have shared content, shared expectations,
shared rules, they understand how to play together. And so they can do, do this over time
collaboratively, and really focus on each other and what's happening,
as opposed to the tool itself. The rate at which people participate in
the system, is very different between trusted communities versus communities of
people who don't know each other as well. Impact has turned out to be really
different. So, when your playing with people that are close to you, and are participating with
people that are close to you, your changes are much more impactful than when your playing with
looser affiliations. And we've tested you know friend groups from Facebook, neighbors, rand
groups, people who you know, seem like each other, and
then sort of these trusted groups. And what we found, interestingly enough,
that in the workplace, that is the top of the
pyramid. Funny enough, people participate more and
are engaged more playing with colleagues. And if you think about it, how much time
do we spend at work? We spend more time and days at work than
with our kids. You know the next layer down is friends
and family. The next level down is some other element of trust, neighborhood, rand
affinity, etc., and the last group are people who are sort of participating with others they
don't know. [INAUDIBLE]
>> Mm hm. So you mentioned the, the, point system,
and feedback system. Can you say a little bit more about how
exactly getting that kind of information and feedback about their
practices, drives people to act in more sustainable ways. >> So if it was just collecting it, it probably wouldn't inspire behavior
change, but what it enables us to do is kind of do two
things, the first is level up somebody. So are they just getting started, or are
they in the middle, or are they an expert. Because that helps make the content that were then, feeding to them through
recommended actions and other things more contextual
to who they are and what they've already
done. And what we know is that, you know, there
are patterns, based on a person's gender, age, presence
of children in the household, part of the country they live in, etc,
about what kinds of things they're going to do and what
they're going to be interested in. And so there's a community element that
drives it. What is the community interested in what
are they doing? But there's also an element that we can,
that we can drive by, by knowing data about
somebody. So if I know you're just getting started
I'm not going to put up a lead home in a solar
action, to get you to try and do that, because you're
going to get, overwhelmed, demotivated and bail out
and not probably play anymore. But if I can get you into, you know,
easier accomplished things that get you feedback
from the community or a badge or an award, that makes you feel
good about what you did, you're more likely to take
that next step. And if that next step is then even more
impactful we used to think. So it's about, you know, it's the same
things you think about in game design, which is how do I, in the beginning, provide reinforcement and
rewards to people? And rewards, I don't mean, you know,
stuff. I mean status, access power. More information, more capabilities etc. How do you get people in and really give
them that feedback loop going, that gets them
doing that next thing? That gives them a positive feedback, so
they do the next thing that provides the
positive feedback. So that then they start being the person
who provides positive feedback to others, and go from being a participant, to being
a contributor, to then being a loyalist. >> But then how do you avoid them being to
focused on the rewards and not any more intrinsically
focusing on what they want to do. >> So that's why one of the reasons we
don't have redeemable points. So many gameification platforms have a
currency around points. Many games do. We have kept that piece out of Practically
Green to date for several reasons. But one of which is the more tangible the
reward mechanism is, and the more valuable it is, the more incentive there
kind of is to cheat and game the system. And so you have to balance the system always to think about why is this person
participating? How are they participating and is this participation producing the intended
result? And, interesting in our business, a little
different than many, is an intended result of people buying more
stuff sort of defeats the purpose. [LAUGH] So, It's almost antithetical to
the, the behavior change we're creating to put
a lot of stuff at the end of it, even if
it's green stuff you know. And so what we instead are trying to do is
to really think about what are the, intrinsic rewards that we can create, and
the intrinsic motivations that we can create
versus the extrinsic. So that, that we go from somebody who, who
maybe joined initially because they were like, oh I got a pat on
the back and. I'm feeling good, and I'm probably an
achiever to start with. And so they're going to collect some of
the, the levels and the badges and stuff. But then it becomes, I learned a lot and
I'm feeling better about the decision that I made in my life so I want
to do something else. I got feedback from somebody that's really
positive, that I'm feeling like a leader or I'm feeling
innovative. And so we think a lot more about how do
you give the people, you know, I think, in an industry you'll say status, action, you
know, access, recognition and power more than stuff because stuff
leads to cheating. Now what's interesting in social is such a
big component in our element that it does keep people more honest than in a
situation where there's lose social networks and
that's another benefit. You should act when your cheating against
people you don't know but when you're sitting in a platform at work
with your colleagues and you're saying that you are composting in the
cafeteria and they all look at you and say no your not your insane
[LAUGH] goes way down. And so we found granted it's one of those
we have to survey people after the fact of hey you checked off that you
did this are you really doing this? etc. That people stick with things for the most
part, some people don't. And you can mark it incomplete in the
system and they just don't and that;'s something that
we, you know, recognize. But, one of the interesting things is
we've seen colleagues claiming behaviors that
they don't actually practice. We don't get anyone saying that they're
seeing that. There just, there just isn't enough reason
to do it and too much downside socially. At least in our trusted groups for doing
that. >> Do you think that eventually, these
kinds of approaches whether we label them
gamification or not will become the norm for behavior change, social
impact kinds of applications, weather, sustainability or
wellness or education, or whatever else. >> It's funny, I started thinking about
the foundations for Practically Green, you know, and sort of the pre
social media days, my biggest challenge, my primary reason
for thinking it wasn't a great idea is I couldn't figure out how to
scale it. And couldn't figure out how to bring
transparency to this social of what people are doing, do you stick a
plaque on their house or. Or drive him around with the score, you
know, how do you do it? And what digital media, has done is it's
given us a way, and social meetings done, to bring transparency to
things that we just didn't know about each other. And with that knowledge and that ease of
being able to compete, compare, and collaborate, I do think that it's going to
make a huge difference in behavior change. I'm a big believer, however, that offline
is as important as online and it's when those two things come together around behavior change that can be really
important. And, so, in weight loss, being in a group
of people that are helping and inspiring and
motivating you with weight loss. Is equally is very powerful and I think
there are online programs that can bring that to there and then there are one that
just don't match that in [INAUDIBLE]. So, you know, I don't think we ever want
to see less of the person to person interaction as a piece of a puzzle, but I think we can use online platforms to
motivate that. >> Great, Susan. Thanks so much for participating in this. >> Oh, thank you very much for having me.