# 7.4 Activity Loops

You can think about the core gameplay
elements in a gamified system in terms of loops. And here I mean loops similarly to the way
computer software programs often operate. Think about a simple program that is
running a constant loop. Check for key press, check for key press,
check for key press, and then if someone presses the key
on the keyboard it fires off another process or subroutine
which says put that letter on the screen and then go back into
the loop. Check for another key press, check for another key press, check for another key
press and when someone does something it breaks the cycle and goes off in another
direction. So a game will also have those kinds of
loops. Structures that are repetitive, recursive,
but also branching off in different
directions. And in particular, we are going to look at
two kinds of activity loops in a game, or especially in a gamified
system, which I'll call engagement loops and
progression loops. Engagement loops operate at the micro
level, individual user actions. Progression loops operate at the macro
level, broader structures of activity .throughout the course of a game, So the
first one is the Engagement Loop. And this is the constant, process of first motivators appearing, the game giving the
user something to do, some reason to be motivated to, take an action to, overcome
a challenge. To, go and do something in the game. And the motivation if it's strong enough,
effective enough, will lead to the action. Maybe it won't, at which point the loop
dies, but then another motivator comes up. And then at that point the user takes the
action. They want to get the points to get to the
reward. So they go and spend time on that part of the site, that's the action, and then the
user gets feedback. Once again, the importance of the user
having clear, direct, and immediate feedback on
what they're doing. Seeing the points they've received. Seeing the level of their performance. That in and of itself then becomes a
motivator. So that's why this is a loop. The actions produces the feedback, the
feedback becomes a form of motivation, the motivation leads
to more actions. So designing a gameified site involves structuring the way that, that loop
happens. And this will be more evident for some
kinds of gamefication than others. The more experiential game-like types of
activities may not be quite as clear cut. But if you think about, especially the PBL
types of sites, think about foursquare. Your action of checking in, then produces
some feedback. Some information that you see about how many points, about badges that you've
unlocked. About, congratulations, you're the mayor,
and so forth. Which then, hopefully, will motivate you
to engage in some other action. Which might be checking in somewhere else. It might be looking at your friends, and
seeing what they're doing. Or reading something about the location
that you're at. The point is, a well designed gamified
system, will keep that process moving. So that each piece reinforces each other
piece. That's the, micro level structure, that
drives forward the action in a gamified site. The way that motivation, it comes together
with feedback and with the set of target
behaviors. We can also look more generally at how the
gamified system moves forward. Through what are called progression loops,
and basically now lets me step back from
individual actions and motivations, and look at the
overall structure, what happens to users in the
site. At one level, the way that this is
typically done in game design is, there are a series of fairly small challenges,
which are part of a larger challenge. So you don't want to just say to the
players, go and start here, and get all the way over to here,
because that seems overwhelming. You say, here's your overall objective. But you're going to get there by means of
some specific steps. Here are the quests that we're going to
give you along the way and they are typically going to be
part of some subchallenges. So this red one and this red one are
intermediate kinds of challenges. And overall the goal of the game is to get
from the start to the finish. So that's one kind of progression loop. Start to finish through a set of intermediate steps, which are all balanced
in an effective way so that the user has a
sense of, first of all,. The ease of the individual steps. The next step is right there in front of
me. As well as the sweep and the potential of
the ultimate goal which also motivates. Another way to think about this is as a
representation of the player journey. The player's evolution in the game from a
newbie, a novice, to a master, and typically the way this is done in games is
through rising and falling action. So the first step is onboarding, that
process of getting someone up to speed as quickly and efficiently as possible and as
much as possible within the game itself. Getting them to the point where they know
how to play the basics of the game on their
own and then you start moving up to a higher level and then at some point you get a
rest. If it's constantly up the slope, that's
too challenging, people get exhausted. So we gave them a break, the difficulty
ramps down. And then it ramps up again, and then it
ramps down, and then it ramps up again, and at some point, we
get to a boss fight. You'll recall this was one of the game
components that I described. Where the game says, now you have a really
hard challenge to conquer, if you want to get to the next
level. So this is a, typically a demarcation
point of getting to the next overall major level or
segment of the game, and an opportunity for real
achievement, real accomplishment, demonstration of mastery
over that part of the game. The boss fight is something you have to
overcome and then once you do, you get a little more rest and then
you start climbing again. And ultimately you are all the way up here
when you started all the way down here. And when you look back you've made
tremendous gains towards mastery that if its done well motivates people through
that sense of competence that I talked about under self-determination
theory, but it's done in a natural way that people don't feel like they’re on
a grueling force march. This system allows them to progress
through this integrated set of challenges it also makes the process feel
more interesting to people. It's not unitary, every moment of the game
is not the same kind of challenge. You're not getting wave after wave after
wave of monsters. There's enough variety there that makes it
interesting. So a well designed game, and a well designed gameification system, will
typically have well structured engagement loops that ensure that feedback
pushes towards motivation, which pushes towards action,
and so forth. And also well structured progression
loops, which get the user from that early stage. Easy to learn, up to that very hard stage
of mastery, tough to master, through a natural set of processes that
allow them to progress through the game.