# 7.2 Objectives and Behaviors

The first two steps in the gamification
design framework are to define your business objectives and to
delineate your target behaviors. Business objectives can be just about
anything. It's the goals that you want your gamified
system to accomplish. So, this can't be something like get
people to accumulate points and badges. That's the way the system works. That might be an intermediate step the
system puts in front of the user. But, ultimately, the badges are only
valuable to the company if they're part of some process that say, gets more
people to buy products or gets more customers to post feedback on
the company's website. Whatever the goal is, the steps in the gamified system are stepping stones to
something else. So business objectives is about what is
this for? And here, I talk about it in terms of
business objectives but you can look at it more broadly if this is
a gamified system that's, for example, for something like
education or health or some sort of behavior change where it might not be
for a direct business purpose. The question is what are the ultimate
goals? What will define whether this gamified
system is a success or a failure? So, let's think about an example. What would be some of the goals of
Foursquare, the social location service that I
introduced you to earlier? And I gave some examples why Foursquare
wanted to gamify, or might have wanted to gamify its site in comparison to
Dodgeball, the predecessor service that had many of the same basic structures in
it for the service but that didn't have the same rich variety of
gamified elements to engage people. So think about what are some of the things that Foursquare might want to try to do
with gamification. Some of those would be the ones that I
talked about earlier, the idea about getting to
scale and so forth. Here's a couple other concrete examples
based on things that Foursquare actually put into
its gamified system. The first is social sharing and this is
directly related to the core challenge that they face as I
talked about, getting people to make a habit of checking in and
not just checking in but posting information about
the places that they go to. If Foursquare can get enough people to put
enough rich, socially and geographically contextual data into their database,
they'll have something that may be really
valuable. But how to get people to do it? And so, the game mechanics in Foursquare. Here's the core check in structure. The notion of seeing who the mayor is, the
notion of seeing who your friends are that are, that are involved,
the notion of seeing the tips people leave and so forth, all of that makes that
sharing more appealing, makes you more likely to check in in a location, which drives the business value
for Foursquare. The business objective is get check ins
and get information about those locations in the check ins
because that ultimately is a way of Foursquare to achieve its
overall business goal, which is to be a profitable and
successful company. Here's another thing, though, that
Foursquare does within the same gamified system. If you are the mayor of a location, you
may get coupons, discounts just for you. And that's about something different. If you're a mayor, then you're already
someone who's checking in. You're checking in a lot. You're an active user of the system. What's the business value that you have
for Foursquare and potentially for its
advertising and marketing partners? Well the value there is that if you're the
mayor, you're the most common visitor to that location, that suggests
that you're a pretty hardcore customer of that
location. You are very likely what marketers call an
influencer. You are someone who other people will look
to for advice. If you like a certain brand or a certain
store or a certain product, then others will take
they'll, their cue from you. You've reached that level where your
buying decisions influence a large number of
other people. And companies, very aggressively today, go
after these influencers, try and woo them with various
gifts and so forth knowing that their
recommendations are more authentic than the company, itself, saying
something is great. So, the mayors are potentially
influencers. And Foursquare and its partners, by
offering these various kinds of coupons, here's one where you get a 30% discount at this store, that's a form of influencer
marketing. Different business objective than social
sharing, which is about habit formation for the mass of users but
another business goal that would be part of the process for
Foursquare if they were sitting down and thinking about
designing their gamified system. So, how do you catalog effectively your
business goals for a gamified system? Here are a few concrete steps to take. The first is, make a list. What are all the business goals or other goals that I want this gamified system to
achieve? List everything you can think of and be as
concrete and specific as possible. Next, rank the list. What's the number one most important goal? What's number two after that? Figure out the hierarchy of which is more important than others and think about
trade-offs. It might be that you have ten different business goals, but some of them are in
conflict. That's not unusual. If you decide what the ranking is, then
you can start to think about which you might want to trade off against the others and which is really important to
you. And once you've done that, you've got a
ranking, the next step is cut out the ones that are not really your business
objectives, if something is just a means, if it's a stepping stone. And this is where most of the game
elements, if not all of the game elements, will
appear. Collecting badges is not a business
objective in the vast majority of cases. It's a means to an end of some other set
of business objectives. If it's not, then you've got a problem. Then you're getting hung up on the game for its own sake without necessarily
thinking about how it benefits you as an
organization, and gamification, again, is about
achieving some benefit. Now, ideally, the user's benefit, the
player's benefit is totally congruent with the
organization's benefit. Again, as I've said a number of times, the
goal is not to come up with some situation where the user is manipulated
surreptitiously to do what the company wants and not what they
want. But, in thinking about this from the side
of the designer, the organization creating the gamified system, you have to
focus first on what your objectives are. And then, using the human-centric,
player-centric kinds of notions that I've talked about, make sure that what you're doing is also
in the interest of the player. Alright, so second step in this process is get rid of everything that's not an
ultimate business objective that would be valuable
in and of itself, but instead is just a stepping
stone. And finally, justify them. For each of the remaining objectives on
your list, come up with a short explanation about why that is
your business objective. Why is that something that you want the
gamified system to achieve? By doing this process, you will not only
generate a list, but you'll start to see some of the dependencies, some of the inner relationships between higher
and lower level structures and between different
parts of the gamified system, which are things that
need to be resolved and play tested out through
the process as the system is designed. That's step one, defining objectives. Step two is delineate target behaviors. So what are target behaviors? Those are the things that you want users
to do. First point is they should be as specific
as possible. I want customers to redeem more coupons
for half off on Bounty paper towels. That's a particular marketing goal that
you might want to use a gamified system for. Or I want to encourage people to try out
my services which, otherwise, they aren't
familiar with, or I want to find the best people to hire for this
job by distinguishing people's skills and
ability at this kind of task. Whatever it is, be as specific as possible about why you are trying to gamify
something. Second is figure out what are the success metrics or I talked about this term
before, what are the win states in gamer terms, for achieving the goals of this gamified
system? In other words, what things would tell you that this gamification project was a
success? What will let you decide that you've
achieved the goals? And obviously, it should be related to
what the behaviors are. But sometimes, the behaviors may be a set
of activities which may be in conflict with other kinds
of goals, or may be in conflict with other kinds of
behaviors on the list figuring out what the success
metrics are. What are the decision points that tell you
that this has achieved its goals will, similarly to the business objectives,
allow for some ranking and some trade-off. And, finally, what are the analytics? What are the ways of measuring the path
towards those success metrics or the, or those win states by virtue of the
activity on those target behaviors. There are a whole variety of different analytics that different companies use in
different areas. The, some of the most developed ones are
in areas like marketing. But your gamified system may have a
different set of analytics depending on the way it's
structured. Here's a few examples of common analytics
that are used in games in particular, social games and
also in marketing context. The first one is called DAU over MAU. DAU stands for daily average users. MAU stands for monthly average users. And this is just a ratio of these two
numbers. The first one is, what is the average
number of people who visit your site on any given
day? So this is typically something that's used
for social games by companies like Zynga and Playdom and
PopCap and so forth. They want to see how often people come
back. If you have a game that gets people to
come back and check in everyday, then your daily numbers are going to be pretty typical of your numbers over a longer time
scale. But if the game is not something that gets people to play frequently, then the ratio
will be different. And that's why we put here the denominator
of MAU. MAU is, during the course of a given
month, what's the total average number of players who
come to your site? MAU will typically be a bigger number because, typically, you might say in the
past month there were, say, 10 million people who visited my website across the entire
month. Many of them, though, came back many
times. We're talking about actual users, not
total number of visits. So, maybe, 10 million distinct people came
to my website in the course of a given
month,. But everyday, the average day in that
month, was only 2 million visitors. That's because lots of people didn't visit
every single day but visited at least one time during
the month. The ratio of DAU to MAU. So, in that case, it would be 2 million
daily average users, the average number of people who
came to my site during the course of that month, over 10
million monthly average users in an average month, a total of 10
million people. This would be 2 over 10 which is clearly
20%, 0.2. That ratio tells you how engaging your
site is. If it's higher, if it's closer to one, one
being every single user comes back every day of the month, then
you have a more engaging site. People come back more frequently. There's richer engagement. They are not just showing up, checking
something out and then leaving and not coming back. The lower the DAU MAU ratio, the more it
is that people are coming sporadically or, again, they're coming a few times and then abandoning, indicators of a less
engaging site. The second metric or analytic that's often
used is often called virality. This has to do with people referring their
friends to go play the game or use the site. The ratio, the rate at which people tell
other people and those other people come to the site thanks to those pointers,
tells you how viral the application is. If one person can tell 20 or 50 or 100
other people and then those people themselves tell that same number of other
people, very quickly, you get this explosive level
of growth. And that's what we've seen with some of the very successful viral applications
recently, things like Pinterest as well as some of
the social games like the Zynga games. A few people started using them and they
told a lot of friends and those friends told a lot of friends and,
suddenly, there was a huge user base. Virality mentions how fast that's
happening. And, finally, something that many gamified
sites look to is the scope of the virtual economy. How much activity is happening? If we have a point system, how many points
get given out each month? How many badges gets earned? How many levels do people game? And if we track that over time, we can see
the level of usage of the interaction, interaction and engagement with the site,
and also what people are doing. Are people predominantly earning points? Are they at the bottom of the leveling
curve or the top of the leveling curve? What does the pattern of usage look like? All of this, all of that tells us a lot
about how the system is operating. So, defining out what those metrics are
that you're going to collect is an important part of
defining a gamified site. So, that gives you a basis for the first
two steps in the design process, which is the context setting of understanding,
basically, what it is you want to do with this gamification
system.