# 2.4 Video Games

Up til now I've been talking about games
in a very general, abstract sense, because gamification draws upon basic
principles that are common to all games. But, it also draws specifically upon a
certain category of games, namely video games, and most of the
gamification examples that we're going to think about involve
online digital systems which are directly related to what we see in
video games. So, it's worth understanding the video
game industry also because of the size of it, and the scale of it, and the pervasiveness of it, are
part of why the motifs of gamification are so
familiar. So, we start 40 years ago, 1972 or so,
with Pong, the first mass market successful video game, still gives
me chills, here it is. Pong was a revolution. There it is. Because it allowed people to interact with
what was on their screen. It, by today's standards of course, was
unbelievably primitive. And, it's hard to imagine how anyone would
get interested in what you see behind me on the screen there, but
Pong, for the first time, gave people the power to interact with a
digital game at home. And, since then, the video game industry
has grown and grown. And now, as I said, it's 40 years old. It is both substantial as a business
phenomenon, pervasive in the experience of, especially
the younger generation of people, particularly in the
West but, in many other parts of the world as well. And, video games have developed a very
sophisticated language of how to express themselves, and
entertain and engage people. Here's one example just to show what I'm
talking about here. This is CityVille, one of the casual
social games on Facebook made by Zynga. And, CityVille, as you can see is, clearly a game and a fairly graphically simple
game, at least compared to some of the rich 3D
immersive games that we have on consoles and PCs
today. Here's the interesting thing about
CityVille. CityVille was launched by Zynga in 2011. In 41 days, it hit a hundred million
registered users. Six weeks, zero, to a hundred million
registered users. An extraordinary rate of growth and, it's
not limited to just this one game or this one company, this is
a huge phenomenon. So here is some statistics to capture just
how big the video game industry is today. The industry, depending on who's numbers
you take, is somewhere on the order of 60 to 80 billion dollars a
year in revenues. Double the revenues of Hollywood from box
office sales of films. Films make money from other mechanisms as well, including tie-ins with games, but if
you're talking abour box office revenues, games
are already much bigger and they're growing faster
than Hollywood. The second is that games are evolving to the point where online games, games played
or distributed online as opposed as to on
consoles like the Playstation and Xbox and Nintendo
Wii. Or, downloaded in a box and loaded on a
PC, the online games are growing faster and
are poised to become the biggest segment of the games
marketplace, and interestingly, already the biggest component of the
online games marketplace is China. So it's not just an American or a Western
phenomenon. The third is that games are becoming the
foundation for other industries. Virtual goods, I will talk about later in
the class, but these are things that you can buy
within the game. Think about a brand new sword for a player
in a massively multiplayer online game. Or, some additional seeds and other
equipment that you might use in a Zynga game like Farmville, things that you pay
real money for that appear in the game, this economy around virtual goods is already many billions of dollars, 7.3
billion globally and 2 billion in the U.S., according to the latest statistics I could
find. A very substantial market which is not
games themselves, but something built on top of the great
success of games. And, finally, the other great evolution is
the rise of mobile games. This was a study early in 2012 that found
that 44% of people, US and UK, have played a mobile game, something like
an Angry Birds on their smartphone in the
last month. So the games industry is big and it's
developing, and I think it's fair to talk about it as the mass medium
of the 21st century. Here are just a few statistics about usage
numbers. If you look at things like the Zygna
games, lots of people I talked about 100 million on
CityVille, 250 million, quarter of a billion unique
registered users and that, it was already probably a few months old,
they've surpassed that. Angry Birds alone, over a hundred million. Xbox Live games, 35. World of Warcraft, over 10 million
players. World of Warcraft, those are paying
players, so that's even more important in terms of
monetization. The other important piece, though, is how
much time people are using these things. And so those 10 million World of Warcraft
players up here, if you look at the amount of time they spend, it's actually huge, it's 50
billion minutes a month, because they're playing for long
periods of time. Whereas something like Angry Birds, even
though it has a higher user base, is only a mere 12 billion minutes a month that people are playing, because people use it
less. Still a pretty big number. And if you look at something like the Xbox
Live games, which are the core console games, so therefore things
people play more, 120 billion minutes a month. So, figure out how much that is across the
player base and figure out how much time that actually
represents, relative traditional media, it's not the same thing as people having
their television on for seven hours a day in the home, but this is
interactive time. It's time where the player is directly
engaged in playing the game. Big, big numbers. So, the important thing here to take away
is that games are a mass phenomenon. And, just to correct a misunderstanding
that people sometimes have, they are not just a mass phenomenon for
teenage boys, it's true that the highest percentage of
gamers is teenagers and young adults, 12 to 17 year olds in
the US. The study by the Pew Research Foundation
found 97 percent play some kind of video games. Virtually everyone, but it's not just
them. An entertainment software association has
found that the average gamer is actually 30 years
old. And if you know anything about averages,
that means there's a whole lot of them that are older than
30. Moreover, it's not just boys or men. Almost half of all video game players
today are women. There are some skewing effects. Women, generally speaking, tend to play
more of the social casual games. Men tend to play more of the first person
shooter types of games. But overall, if you talk about video games
as an experience, as a mass medium, as a phenomenon that people are conversant
with and familiar with, it cuts across all those
boundaries. And the final point is that video games
are not just going in and guns blazing, blowing
something up, and shooting things. Sure, there are games that involve that,
and some of them have been very successful
but, especially in recent years, we've seen the rise of many different categories of games that
are very different. So, for example, the sandbox games things
like Minecraft, which if you're not familiar with you should go
check out, Minecraft is a game that was written by a single
developer, that is incredibly rudimentary in terms of its
graphics, has no purpose. You go into Minecraft, you're given a
world, and you have to dig things up and find different kinds
of ore and chop down trees, and do other things to
create raw materials, and then put them together in different
ways and build things. Why? Well, because it's fun. And it turns out that Minecraft has been a
sensation. Huge numbers of users voluntarily paying
money to pay this game. Which in most of the time, they were doing
so was far from finished. It was expressly an alpha or beta form. People found this very compelling. In part because they could share their
creations with other people. It gave them a huge sandbox. You could make anything you want in
Minecraft. Another category are the building games
right here, I already mentioned Civilization by
Sid Meier. The Sim City games by Will Wright/sp. Games that let you create and build
things. Again, not to kill 'em, but to figure out
how your actions in running a complex system like a city, or like a
nation state, create results as they interact with each other and with
other parts of the system. A derivative of those are what I'll call
social building games. Here's where we see things like Farmville
and The Sims. Games that have that construction,
building element, but also involve collaborating with and interacting with
other players in the game. Showing off what you're doing for other
players. Having a social dimension, in addition to
that building dimension. Very popular, very successful. Then, we have the massively multiplayer
online games, things like World of Warcraft,
which again have been quite successful and do
have some measure of running around and killing things, but also have guilds and communities, and things like auction
houses, and things like leveling up characters in
different skill areas and crafting, and exploring
worlds. A rich experience much more than just the pure competitive, pure destruction
element of games. And finally, puzzle games. Things like Angry Birds where you have to
figure out, how do I pull this slingshot just the right way
to knock over the structure. Or Portal and Portal 2, very successful
hit game in recent years, in which the player has to figure
out how to create holes in a wall that, when you put
them together, solve a puzzle of how to get out of a
room. If you haven't played go and look at some YouTube videos or some information on
the game. Really successful powerful game using
simple kinds of problem solving mechanics. And the point here is that these are not
outliers or exceptions, these in many cases are the most successful game
releases in recent years. So, games are big. They are sophisticated. They are pervasive across modern life, and
they are diverse. They are not just as simple as you might
think and they are not just about graphics, they are about all these different forms of interaction,
individually and socially.