# 7.3 Players

Who are these people who are playing your game, or engaging in your game of
fightsight. And, I don't just mean what do they look
like in the game. They seem to be a bunch of orcs and elves and other strange monsters riding on
war bears. What I mean is, what do you know about the
players? That starts with the standard kinds of
measures, like demographics, age groups, and where they live and so
forth, income level. All those kinds of metrics that you might
want to get in any standard kind of marketing
survey. And psychographics. What do you know about their behavior? What kinds of things do they like to buy? What kinds of things do they like to do? All of those are useful in understanding
the players for gamification, just as they're useful in any other kind of
marketing, or other activity, where. You're trying to do something involving
certain populations of people, and you need to typically segment,
and not try to be all things to all people,
because different sub communities will have
different sorts of needs. That's all the starting point, and that
will be more or less feasible or normal to do based on the
nature of the application. If it's a standard marketing type external
gamification situation, then that kind of data may already be
there. If it's one of the other categories, then
maybe it's not as useful. But in any situation you can figure out
what types of people are they here. Knowing that the players in this
particular system are a group of your employees, as opposed to a group of your customers,
for example, makes a big difference. So starting point is general things that
you know about your players. But the real important aspect to learn in describing your players, is what
motivates them. What can you say, as a starting point,
about the different kinds of motivations that
your players have. Because again, as I've said many times, gamification, very directly, and, and
frequently involves motivation. So here we see a chat room log from World
of Warcraft. Just the illustrate some of the different
kinds of things that will motivate players, even in one
massively multi-player online game, and we can see it just by the
different things people are asking for here in the
chat room. So this person here the lingo may not mean
anything to you if you're not a wow player, but this person here is looking for a couple other specific
skills. A fighter that does damage, and a healer
for, and what's called an instance run. They're trying to defeat the bosses or
monsters, in this specific dungeon in World of
Warcraft. So that's a group that's coming together
to try to beat a dungeon, and they need some
help. This person here is looking for what's
called an enchanter. Somebody who has specific craft skills, because the person posting wants to
improve the quality of their gear, their armor or
their weapons, and they need help. They need someone who can cast spells on
them. So they're using the chat room to go and
find an enchanters. That's something about improving the
quality of what you have on your character, which may then be
useful for dungeons, or it may be useful because
they want to show off to other people or
something else. And this also shows that some people are
involved in the Crafting system. Those enchanters have spent time and money
in the game, to build up skills in casting those specific kind of spells, a different kind of activity within the
game. This person here is trying to sell
something for 450 gold. The game has an auction house where you
can buy and sell, but this person is going and trying
to do it directly. Trying to make money, engaged in economic
activity in the world. Again, a different type of activity than
the previous ones. And all of these different activities
relate to different examples of things that people may want to
accomplish. This one here is a group that's trying to
get an achievement. So, they're going to go through a dungeon,
but the point is not really to defeat the monsters
in the dungeon. The point is to get this achievement that
the game has set up. If you conquer a certain dungeon in a
certain way, you get a reward. You get a recognition that you get that
achievement. And so that's the objective of that group
that's going on there. Lots of different things happening, all
within the same game, a key to why World of Warcraft is so successful, and a lesson
that we can take to apply to gamification. Alright. So, how do you define different kinds of
players in a gamified system? The most common model of player types that
is discussed today in gamification, is the Bartle model
of player types. Richard Bartle, who I mentioned earlier as
the games researcher and designer from The
University of Essex. Came up with this framework several
decades ago, when he was studying the early multi-user
dungeon's. The early massively multiplayer online
games. And what he found was certain recurrent
patterns, and four broad types that he could bucket
players into. Now, Bartle was expressly, not trying to
make a statement about player types in every
game. And he certainly wasn't trying to make a
statement about motivational types in the world in general, that would
extend past games. But his framework has proven to be very
durable. It's a great starting place, because you
can find these four categories in pretty much
any kind of situation that gameification would
apply to, but take it with a grain of salt. Exactly what the borders are between these categories, and exactly what the
percentages are of people that fit in to them, is
subject to great debate. And Gamification applied in a particular
area may involve a different set of categories of player types, for example if
it's an internal gamification system. For helping people get to know each other
at work. Or for improving the productivity of
researchers trying to piece together pieces of
information. Maybe these four categories I'm going to
give you don't work. But as a starting point, it's a great way of thinking about different kinds of
player types. So Bartle talked about four categories. A two by two matrix of player types. On this axis, on the one side are players,
and on the other side are the world, or is the
world. On this axis at the top is acting, on
those things, and at the bottom is interacting
with those things. So, players who want to act upon the
world, he called achievers. [SOUND] These are people who want to reach some achievement to overcome some
obstacle. Probably to get some recognition of their
achievement. And so they want to do some action in the world that the game creates, and get
recognition for that achievement. Those who want to interact with the world
he called explorers. These are the people who want to see
what's possible within the game, go scope out all
the territory. Go try and see if they can jump off of
that mountain, and not fall to their doom. Push on the limits of the game, just
because it's there to quote Edmund Hillary's statement about
why he climbed Mountain Everest. The explorers want to try out every piece
of the world that they can find to find new vistas to figure out new
things to do with the game. Down here, people who care about players
as opposed to the world, but want to interact with those
players, Bartle called socializer's. So, these are players who care particularly about interacting with
others. Being on teams. Talking and chatting with other players of
the game, being part of a community. The social experience is more important
than the achievements that come out of that social
experience. And finally the most controversial
category Bartle had for acting upon other players, he called
these killers. And usually killers are described as
people who don't just want to go out and win the game, because that's an achiever,
but want to stomp on other people. To fight against other players, and
totally vanquish, and destroy them. In Bartle's framing, killers is actually
broader than that. It's anyone who wants to impose themselves
on other people. So that could also be, for example, by
healing other people, by feeling like you're in
control of the situation, and that you're the one who's
keeping the whole group alive, that would also fit in
this category. But basically Bartle talked about killers
as a small, but important part of the system. Most people are not killers most of the
time. Some estimates are that it's 1% of the
population. But they are often the most intense and
aggressive participants. They are the ones who really care about the game, because they will go to any
length to vanquish their opponents to be the top dogs in charge of whatever they're trying
to do. So four different categories that Bartle
defined. You can think about how those are applied
to any situation that might be gamified. Important caveat. This does not mean that we are all born in
one of these quadrants, that people are always
explorers, or always socializers. Pretty much all of us are in every one of
these quadrants at some time or another, for
some situation or another. And we typically will go back and forth
between different kinds of activities. So thinking about player types doesn't
mean segmenting your players once and for all,
it means, first of all, understanding what
are the different niches that your players can go
into. And then understanding how your players at
a specific time in the game might respond to one or more of these
kinds of structures.