# 1.1 Introduction

[BLANK_AUDIO] Hi there, I'll be your professor in this
course. Now, don't worry, I'm not actually going
to teach the class from inside a video game. But I am going to show you how some of the
techniques that designers use in games like this one can be applied to problems in business, education, health,
and other fields. That's a technique that we call
gamifcation. Hang on a second, I'll get out of here. [BLANK_AUDIO] Much better. Hi there. I'm Kevin Werbach, a professor at the Wharton School of the University of
Pennsylvania. And I'm thrilled that so many of you have
signed up for this online course of the emerging
field of gamification. In the next six weeks, I'm going to teach
you about what gamification means, and how you can apply
it to solve real world problems. Some of you may not be familiar with the
concept of gamification, so let me give a brief
introduction here. I'll give you a much more concrete and
detailed definition later on. Gamification is about learning from games. So, what can we learn from Angry Birds? Well, we can learn that there's something
really popular there. Angry Birds and its various incarnations has been downloaded over one billion
times. Can one billion people be wrong? But there's more to it than that. Gamification is about learning from games,
not just in the sense of learning about the games themselves, but understanding what makes the games
successful. Understanding what makes the games
engaging. Understanding what games can do, why games
have power. And then taking some of those techniques,
and thoughtfully applying them to other situations which
are not themselves games. So, for example, let me show you a service
called Samsung Nation. Again, we'll talk about this in more
detail later on. Samsung Nation is something that Samsung
has on its corporate website, and it's a system using what we call game elements or game mechanics to solve Samsung's
business problem. Which is they want more people to come to
their site, and they want people to do things on
their site to interact with their products, to write
product reviews, to watch videos, to find out more, to register
products they've already bought. So what Samsung has done here is to build a site using simple elements that they've
developed from games. Things like leaderboards. Things like, badges to reward
achievements. Things like point systems. And they've taken these and applied them
to a situation that isn't a game. The situation is Samsung wants you to
spend time and do stuff on their website, so that you will
eventually buy more products. That's an example of gamification. It's not by any means the only kind of
example of gamification. As we'll see, gamification is by no means
limited to these kinds of contexts that you see
here. But it's a good example as a starting
point of what we're talking about. So in the next series of lectures, I'll
start to unpack what exactly gamification means
which will then allow us to start to understand how to do it
effectively, and what are some of the challenges in
applying these techniques. And if you're curious about what the
things are on the bookcases behind me, well, you'll just have to watch the rest
of the videos to find out.