# 12.2 Inducement Prizes

Inducement prizes are a motivational
technique that's got a great deal of attention in recent years, but which actually has a fairly well established
history. In the pictures here, you can see 2
people. The one on the left is Charles Lindbergh,
the famous aviator. The one on the right is not so familiar. He's Raymond Ortieg, a New York City hotel
owner. So, why are they in the picture together? Well in 1919, Orteig promised a prize of
$25,000 which was a lot of money at the time to the first person or team to successful
fly nonstop across the Atlantic Ocean from New
York to Paris. Lindbergh was competing successfully as it
turned out to win the Orteig prize. So, prizes are a way to either reward
certain behavior. We give out prizes like the Nobel Prize
based on something that people have done in the
past, but they can also be a way to induce behavior, to encourage people to do
something in the future. In this sense an inducement prize is a way of motivating certain activity to gain a
result which hasn't been achieved before, which is an
alternative to other kinds of methods like giving a grant
out. You can hire a person or a company to do
something or you can put up prize of the same amount of money and give it to whoever successfully reaches
the achievement. So what's the benefit of doing it through
an inducement prize? Well, there are a few fairly substantial
ones. One of them is efficiency. So Orteig's prize again was $25,000. It's estimated that Lindbergh and all the
others chasing the prize spent a total of $400,000 in the money of
the time, chasing the prize. So Orteig by putting up 25,000
incentivized far more investment to try to reach the
accomplishment. The second major reason why inducement
prizes are valuable is that they can encourage interest, creative out
of the box kinds of solutions. So here's an example. When the Exxon Valdez oil tanker ran
aground in Alaska, the Oil Spill Recovery Institute created a prize for
someone who could come up with a way to pump oil that had become viscous to
solid in the frigid waters off of Alaska, where
the tanker had run aground. Under current techniques, it was too cold
to pump the oil easily out of the water. The winner was an Illinois chemist, and
the technique that he submitted which turned
out to be very successful, he developed because a
few years earlier, he had been helping a friend lay some
concrete. And he developed a technique using
vibration to keep the concrete from getting to hard as it
was being poured and it turned out, the same
technique worked extremely well for oil in the cold waters off of
Alaska. Had the Oil Spill Recovery Institute or
anyone gone out and looked to hire someone to develop a technique, it's pretty
certain they would not have gone to this Illinois chemist or looked at a technique
that came from pouring concrete and trying to apply it oil in the water, but it
turned out to work very well. The contest by not specifying the means,
just specifying the end, specifying the objective was able to sweep in that great
out of the box solution. So what do inducement prizes then have to
do with gamification? Well, the first point is inducement prizes
are about motivation. It's a prize to motivate a result. And as I've been talking about all along,
gamification is a systematic way of employing
techniques to motivate. An inducement prize is a particular kind of reward structure that's designed to
motivate behavior. Now the question though is, it's clearly
an extrinsic reward. An inducement prize typically involves
money. It's not something that says do this just
because it's inherently fun. So, is an inducement prize something that
fits into the techniques of gamification that I've
been talking about? Well actually, yes it is. So think back to the various factors that
I've talked about under self-determination theory for
something being intrinsically rewarding: competence,
autonomy, and relatedness. All of them are present in a well-designed
inducement prize competition. It requires skill and accomplishment by
the person or group that submits the
successful answer. It requires them to show mastery to prove
that they have a great solution to a really
hard problem. People submit for the prize, not just to
win the tangible reward but to demonstrate the success of
the technique they have. We'll see this with some of the more recent inducement prizes such as the X
Prize Foundation and the prizes that they put
into place in which lots and lots of teams
spent almost as much, if not more money than the
value of the prize because they wanted to prove how great their solutions were
more so than caring about the amount that
they'd win. So that's competence. Secondly, autonomy. Again, the inducement prize does not tell
you how to come up with a solution, it just says you figure it out, come up
with something that achieves this result. And that allows a tremendous amount of
freedom and flexibility which hits on that aspect of autonomy that's
important for intrinsic motivation. And finally, relatedness. Inducement prizes go out to everyone or to
a large group of people and organizations and they typically require collaboration
and coordination among teams of people. And in many cases, they are about achieving some major important
societal goal. Orteig wanted to show that it was possible
to fly a plane across the ocean nonstop. Some of the more recent prizes are
designed to achieve public policy goals like
building autonomous cars. And therefore people submit to the prize
partly as a way of moving science and knowledge
forward. So even though inducement prizes clearly
have an extrinsic component in the tangible
reward, they can be designed in ways that leverage the power of intrinsic motivation and fun as
well. Now recently, there's been a spate of
inducement prizes both from the private sector and the
public sector. There are whole companies like you know,
Innocentive, Kaggle and TopCoder, which specialize in
designing inducement price competitions for various different kinds
of scenarios, some of the them scientific, some of them more
commercial. And then there's even organization like
the X Prize Foundation which are in the business as a non-profit, of developing various kinds of inducement
prize competitions. The X Prize Foundation got its start with
the Ansari X Prize, which was a $10 million prize to the first
team able to privately build a space craft capable of entering
low earth orbit and the winner was a team that was funded by Richard
Branson, the entrepreneur behind Virgin. And that inducement prize competition had
the same effect as the Orteig prize. It generated a tremendous amount of
activity. So the prize in this case was $10 million
dollars. It's estimated that teams spent over $100 million chasing that reward and thereby
vastly advanced the state of aerospace research
especially in the private sector thanks to the prize. So in addition to private competitions
like the ones I've described, there also are a
number of price competitions that are being
pushed by government agencies, in particular in the
United States. The organization DARPA which funds
military related research has a series of grand challenges that they call it including the self driving car one that I mentioned which had been extremely
successful. The Office of Science and Technology
Policy in the White House has an initiative that has led to a number of
different agencies developing these competitions and the United States
Congress passed something called the America
Competes Act which encourages and makes possible these
kind of competitions on a wide scale. So overall, there have been more than 45 US government agencies that have
established these kinds of challenges or prize competitions
and more than 200 challenges that they've put
forth. And that's just what's happening in the
United States government. So, what does it take to design one of
these prize competitions effectively? You can't just put up money and expect to
get results. As with gamefication, design matters. Coming up with a contest and a system that
really encourages behavior, that encourages again that
intrinsic motivation of the participants is
critical. The first issue with an inducement prize
is there have to be enough people able to compete and
win it. If this is a challenge that only one group, one company say, has the necessary
skills and resources to achieve, then you should just
go and hire them and pay them to do it. So it needs to be something that a number of organizations can think that
they can accomplish. Secondly and in a related vein, it has to be something that is cheap enough so that
those organizations are willing to spend their
own money chasing the inducement prize only pays off to the
winner. Everyone else puts out the cost, but
doesn't get the prize. Third, there has to be a balance of the scale of the competition and the
incentives of the participants. So what do I mean by this? Karim Lakhani is a professor at Harvard
Business school who has written some of the most significant and influential work on these inducement
prizes. And one of the things that he and his
collaborators have talked about is that in designing one of these
inducement prizes on the one hand, there's the incentive to make it as
big as possible, get as many people or as many companies as
possible competing for the prize. That leads potentially to more out of the
box solutions. You've got more competitors, more of a likelihood someone's going to come up,
going to come up with a great solution that no
one else thought of. The challenge though, is that the more
competitors, the less of a chance that any one competitor will win
which potentially reduces motivation. If you know there are a 1,000 or 10,000
teams competing, you might think, well what chance do I have of
actually being the winner? That may disinsent your participation. On the other had, if it's something that
only 10 teams are seriously pursuing, that may motivate you to think you've got a great change of being the one that's
successful. And again, it's a balance in designing any
competition. The designer needs to think about the
nature of the task at hand and how best to design
it. Finally, there ideally should be some
opportunity to leverage the results. In the public prizes, the ones that government agencies put forward, there
almost always is. These are competitions designed for the
purpose of advancing the scientific state of the art and often private
organizations have benefits as well. So why did Richard Branson spend 10
million dollars or more competing for that 10 million dollar
On Sorry X prize. Well in that case, it was partly the glory
but it was also partly to set up a private
space tourism business called Virgin Galactic which is
based on the technical research and the notoriety that the team
gained in the competition. So prices are one area where potentially a
tangible monetary reward can have actual benefits
and lead to important results.