# 6.1 Limits of Behaviorism

There's a lot to learn from behaviorism. Certainly the notion that we should be
scientific and systematic and not just rely on people's reporting of their
feelings is a worthwhile endeavor. And some of the concepts that behaviorism
focuses on, for example, the importance of feedback,
the idea that feedback loops can systematically modify
people's behavior is an important finding and one that's quite
relevant to gamification. And the different kinds of rewards that we
talked about can help us see how to construct different kinds of
systems to motivate behavior. But there are serious limitations and
blind spots to the behaviorist approach, and we need to understand them in order to
have a full picture of gamification. For starters, there's some important
things that behaviorism leaves out. Let's go back to the Speed Camera Lottery
example. Why do people slow down when there is this
sign that shows them how fast they're going, and the possibility of winning some money if they're not
speeding? Well, the first thing to think about, is that people slow down even without the
lottery. When there's just a sign showing people
how fast they're going, there seems to be an effect that people
slow down even then. So, how do we explain that? Well some of it has to do with feedback,
clearly. People are seeing their speed. It's making them aware of how fast they're
going, which is then creating a reaction and causing the
person to slow down. But is it just that the person is becoming
aware that they were speeding? Or is what's going on something like this? The driver says hmm, is this just a sign? Or is there perhaps a camera in it somewhere hidden here that's going to take
a picture of me and I'm going to get sent a ticket automatically because I was
speeding? Or perhaps, is there a cop right behind
the sign who's going to give me a ticket if I go too
fast? In which case I'm slowing down, not
because of the feedback so much. I'm slowing down because I want to avoid
the punishment. Punishments are just a flip side of
rewards. They work the same way. So at some level, this is a kind of standard behavioristic count, but it's
very much cause and effect. We want to avoid the direct punishment, so
we take some action. It's not about people changing their
behavior and learning. It's just people slowing down because they
think they're going to get caught. So, what about now the Speed Camera
Lottery example? What does the lottery change? Well, from a behaviorist's standpoint,
first it's hard to think about it. But if you look at this through that kind
of behavioral lens, what you say is, well, behaviorism is
about testing what people do. And what's different here is a chance of
winning money. And turns out, that people love lotteries. There's some reason why the're lotteries
all over the place and people will spend their money on them, even when
the odds are terrible! When you know empirically, statistically,
you're very likely to lose. Not a good bet to make. People still play the lottery all the
time. So a behaviorist might say, alright,
people love lotteries. That's a lesson, that's a fact that we
know. So this works because it's a lottery, and
that's all we need to know. So let's do lotteries in lots of other
places. And this was in fact the description of
the Speed Camera Lottery. From Richard Thaler, one of the leading
figures in Behavioral Economics in an op-ed piece that he wrote
about this phenomenon. And basically his conclusion was,
policymakers should use lotteries. And maybe that's a helpful conclusion, but
the point I want to make is, it leaves a lot out. Why do people like lotteries? Is it just that we're irrational? What's actually going on there? What is it about the lottery here that's
motivating to people? And to answer that question you have to go
beyond behaviorism. Because now we're not just talking about,
what do people do? Now we're going to, what do people think
and feel? And what is actually in there motivating
someone to act in a certain way? So that's part of the story that's
important in general, and in particular important
for gamification. So first big issue with behaviorism is it
leaves out a lot. But there's some other reasons to be concerned about a purely behaviorist
approach. And as it turns out B.F. Skinner's work on operant conditioning, fell out of favor
in psychology. There's still been a great deal of work in
that area. And much of the literature on feedback and
today the work in the quantified self area can be seen as being
part of that same tradition. But, the notion of modifying people's
behavior through these constructed systems of reward, or punishment based on
learning from feedback scared people. And they got associated with things like
Socialism and Fascism that were trying to manipulate and change people's
behavior in ways that people didn't want. Now, that's probably not entirely fair. But in thinking about the implications of behaviorism for gamification, it's worth
keeping in mind. Because if you take a purely behaviorist
approach, you tend to focus on the person involved, again, as
a black box. And that tends to move away from the
notion that this is a human being, and this is a
player. Remember game thinking is about empowering
the person as a player. They are the center of the action. So, this focus on rewards in behaviorism,
well, again, it can be useful and productive in the ways that we've talked
about, tends to also have some problems. And in fact, there are a number of serious problems with a behaviorist approach which
we'll turn to next.