# 10.1 Gamification for Good

Can gamification make
the world a better place? Can it help people improve
the quality of their lives? Sure, obviously. At some level, gamification is a tool for
motivation, and that motivation can be something
like getting you to buy some more of a certain breakfast cereal, or getting
you to fill out a market research survey. But it could also be motivating
you to eat healthier. Motivating you to use less energy and
therefore reduce your carbon footprint. Motivating you to learn about
personal finance skills, which are important to help
you escape from poverty. So gamification certainly can be used for
social good. And in fact, I've already mentioned
a number of examples in the course so far that would go in that category. But it's still worthwhile
to look specifically at gamification in this area for
a couple of reasons. First of all,
there are some different issues. There are some unique challenges for
gamification in the social impact or social good arena, and some interesting
opportunities or techniques that seem to work more effectively for
these kinds of applications. Secondly, it's valuable
to see the range of applications that are out
there in the world today. Things that organizations are already
doing in a wide variety of areas, using gamification as the motivational
tool to encourage people to take actions that are either good for
them or good for the world. And here under social good,
I'm lumping in both of those categories, things that have some societal benefit
above and beyond the benefit for the organization that's putting
together the program or the place where the person works. That's one kind of gamification for
social good. And the other one is a set of things that
involve helping the person become better, become happier and
more fulfilled, healthier. That may certainly tie into
broader social good, and it may tie into the business interest
of certain companies, but fundamentally the applications are about making people
better, making them more awesome. So I lump both of those into
the category of social good and talk about how gamification
can be applied in those areas. One preliminary issue,
is that independent of applications that are specifically about social good,
there's a lot of positive energy and emotion and
engagement that comes out of games, and that comes out of being involved
in truly gamelike activities. This is something that Jane McGonigal
goes into in detail in her book Reality Is Broken. Games produce positive energy,
they produce sociability, they make us more focused and
engaged on tasks and so forth. So there's a lot of potential good
in making things more gamelike. There also are some risk and dangers
in certain versions of gamification, as we've talked about. But it's worth noting that there's
a lot of reason to think that purely trying to find some fun and
find some engagement and find that kind of problem solving spirit of games in any
task has some positive social value. But specifically,
what's different about gamification in a context where the application
is deliberately focused on some kind of social impact or
personal impact? The first issue is motivation, and it goes to the element of relatedness
under self-determination theory. As I talked about, relatedness is one
of the three components of intrinsic, internal, self-directed, inherent motivation under
self-determination theory. And it's the one that has to do with being
part of something bigger than yourself. That might be interacting with friends, or it might be the activity having
some greater meaning or purpose. When we're talking about
social good applications, that's there almost by definition. That's what distinguishes these
kinds of situations from other ones. There is something involved that is
bigger than the individual there's some, larger social good or some larger life
well-being good involved in the activity. But it's not always simple to unlock
the power of that sense of relatedness. There's always things that we think we
should do, or think would be good for us, or think would be noble and worthy for
us to do, and yet we just don't do them. So gamification in social good
context is really primarily about activating that sense of relatedness,
making it meaningful and real so that people act on their latent desire
to engage in some kinds of activities. Second one is that there's a caveat there,
which is that to the extent gamification is about rewards, people might question,
well, is there something troubling in saying instead of just motivating
you because you think this is good. You're engaged in this activity because
you believe in protecting wildlife, or you're concerned about climate change, or you want to learn something
that is beneficial to you. Instead of just doing that for
the purely intrinsic reason, maybe there's a danger that gamification
puts a premium on doing it for the short-term reward, for the points,
for the badges, for the achievements. Or maybe even for some prize type award, some tangible reward that
goes along with them. And that potentially is problematic
because it ties into that crowding out or over justification effect that we saw
in the discussion of intrinsic and extrinsic motivation. To the extent that gamification for
social good is about game elements and their rewards replacing, or
substituting for, the inherent relatedness-based intrinsic motivation of
the activity, that could be a bad thing. That could actually lead to
less beneficial activity. For example, as I described in the study
of day care centers, where giving people a penalty, charging them for coming late,
actually made them come late even more. So that's something to keep in mind and
to avoid in these contexts. The next one is that most,
but not all, of the examples that involve gamification for social good
have some element of behavior change. So they are about that third broad
category of gamification, which I haven't talked about as much in the course,
that's about getting people over the hump. Doing something that
they already want to do. Changing the way that they
act in a certain area. As opposed to an organization trying to
motivate either its external communities, i.e., customers, or its internal
employees and extended networks. So therefore, part of this unit will
be focusing on behavior change and habit formation as
a distinct kind of practice.