# 8.4 Designing for Happiness

How can gamification be applied in a way that makes people happy, fulfilled,
flourishing individuals? To answer that question, we need to look
to the discipline of positive psychology. Positive psychology was developed most
notably by Marty Seligman, who's at the University of Pennsylvania and also by
Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi and I put his name up there on the slide because
that's the only way that you're going to be able to
spell it. And the idea of positive psychology is that psychology generally is about
pathology, is about what happens when something goes wrong,
someone has some abnormal mental situation that
doesn't allow them to think straight, or they are depressed, or they are psychotic in some
way, and the question that Seligman started
asking was, well, why don't we look at the opposite? Why don't we look at what makes people
happy and fulfilled? Why don't we look at what things it takes to make people feel better about
themselves, and to feel like they have authentically happy,
flourishing lives, as opposed to just, what happens when
something goes wrong? And so that's what the discipline of
positive psychology looks at, and it's the basis of large volumes of
research into many different areas. It turns out that much of this is very
relevant to understanding the implication of games, and thus by
extension certain kinds of gamification. Jane McGonigal in her book, Reality is
Broken, points to Seligman's work, and in some of her later presentations
points to how games directly can address all of the elements of his
framework for human flourishing, which she calls, PERMA, which stands for positive emotions, engagement,
relationships, meaning, and achievement. And I won't go through each of them in
detail, but it should be obvious how each of these
elements, which Seligman says are the five core aspects of being a fulfilled,
flourishing individual, not just happy in a kind of light, short term sense, but
truly successful as an individual. It turns out that all five of these
elements clearly tie into things that we've
discussed as core elements of games, most of which
gamification, if it's done right and thoughtfully, has some
opportunity to tap into. So that's the high level way that
gamification and games can actually promote human flourishing, but I want to specifically talk about the concept of
flow, which is one of Csikszentmihalyi's major contributions, because that ties in even
more directly to some of the game design concepts that I've discussed around
gamification. The idea of flow is that there is a state
that we sometimes get into, where we are so engaged in what we're doing that
time seems to lose its meaning. We lose ourself in the activity. We are fully and completely engaged to the
fullest our, of our abilities. It's a state that is wonderful, and it's a
state, interestingly enough, that occurs at least as often in work activities as it
does in entertainment or play activities. And Csikszentmihalyi started, many years
ago, to investigate this kind of flow staye in all sorts of
situations. In musicians, and rock climbers, and
financial analysts, lots of people who had this same characteristic
kind of experience, and he developed a set of theories around what it
takes to get into the flow state. Now, it's not something that you can do
automatically and directly. You can't say, alright, I'm going to go
into flow now. It's something that happens organically
when an activity has certain characteristics that are at a sufficient
level for that individual. But we can think about what the
characteristics are of allowing flow to occur in a way that's useful for
games and gamification. So, Csikszentmihalyi presents a chart that
looks at, over time, what is the difficulty level of a
certain activity. How challenging is it? And the idea here is that if the activity is too difficult, up here, it
creates anxiety. It's too tough. We can't succeed at it. It scares us off. We get anxious about the activity. On the other hand, if it's too easy, we
get bored. Something that is way below our activities
is a sure recipe for boredom. In the middle is what Csikszentmihalyi
talks about as the flow channel. So if we stay between these two
boundaries, and have an activity that over time is constantly
not too easy, not too hard, that's where we have the
opportunity for flow, especially if our movement through this
channel is variable. If it's an interesting activity that
maintains its challenge, it's not something that we just get on auto
pilot and do. The challenge ramps up as we move along,
but the system is designed to keep adapting, so we never go either
too hard or too easy. So that's a key to achieving this notion
of flow, and therefore, in game design, game designers think a lot
about tuning the system so that four players, it's neither too
hard nor too easy, and yet it keeps int it remains interesting
and variable throughout the process. To get to a few more aspects of flow that
Csikszentmihalyi talks about that are relevant for games and gamification,
he says flow occurs when there are clear
goals, and we've talked about this in terms of the fundamental definition of games,
and we've talked about it in terms of the first design criteria for designing a
gamified system. He second, he says there needs to be a balance between perceived challenges
and skills. That's the essence of the chart I just
gave you, but the important thing here is to remember that these are
perceived challenges and perceived skills. The game feels like it's just hard enough. Whether it is in some objective way,
there's really no way to tell. The question is, how do you feel about the
experience? And is it tuned in a way you feel like it
remains sufficiently interesting? And third, I've talked about this a lot,
feedback. Clear and immediate feedback. And this is not feedback in the pure
behaviorist sense, of you're just learning from the experience and moving
along and creating an association, creating some
reinforcement. This is feedback allowing you to get to
the point where you feel totally immersed in the experience, and have that wonderful experience of
flow. So if you can design gamified systems to
push more in this direction, to activate the five areas of flourishing
that Seligman talks about, and to maintain the requirements for flow that Csikszentmihalyi talks about, you will
create a system that is deeper and more rewarding
than any kind of extrinsic external motivator can ever be.