# 3.4 Tapping the Emotions

I've been talking about game thinking in very clinical or structural terms, very
process oriented. It's important though, as you're doing
that, not to lose sight of what really makes games engaging, the emotional
component of the experience. And we can represent in one very short
word what it is that makes games engaging. Games are engaging because they are fun. Fun is a word that we use to represent
what it is about things like games that makes
them good, that makes them wonderful, that engages
us, that makes us want to start playing them and want to
keep playing them. Fun is a hard word to get your arms
around, kind of like games. But, as we're able to define games, we'll
be able to define fun or, at least, define some aspects of
what makes things fun. The starting point is a quote from the
great philosopher, Mary Poppins, who noted that, in every job there is to be done,
there is an element of fun. You find the fun and snap! The job's a game. Important point here. Notice what she's talking about. She's talking about jobs. She's not talking about play time. She's talking about how to make things
that you have to do fun, and of course, in the context of the play that's an important
lesson that she's teaching, but it points up something
very significant. Fun is not limited to recreation, fun is
not limited to entertainment, fun is something that we
can enjoy at work. It's something we can enjoy in all sorts
of context. And therefore, when we think about
gamification, think about making work or social impact, or behavior change seem
more engaging and game like. It's essential to think about how to make
it fun. But the question is, what's fun? So, think for yourself. What are some of the kinds of things that
you feel are fun? I'm not saying an activity. I'm not saying that you think it's fun to jump out of airplanes or something like
that. What are the categories of emotions or the
categories of experiences that you would think of as
fun? Try to think about as many different
possible ones as you can. And think about how they relate to
different kinds of fun. Here's some things I've come up with that
are fun. Winning, all right, that's an easy one. Many games have the idea of winners and
losers and certainly winning is something that we think of as fun, but
it's not the only thing. Problem-solving. Sometimes the fun comes in overcoming
obstacles. In surmounting challenges. Whether we win or not, even if the
activity doesn't have the notion of a winner, just solving the problem,
achieving something that in and of itself is fun. Or, sometimes just exploring. Just finding something new feels like fun
to us, whether or not it's embedded in some kind of challenge or some kind of
game that has winners or losers. Or, what about just chilling out? Lying on a beautiful beach, in the sun,
relaxing, at least for me, is fun. Even though it doesn't have any of those
other attributes. Teamwork. We are hard wired as a species to enjoy
collaborating and cooperating with others, working together as a team to achieve a
goal independently feels like fun. Recognition. Now, recognition is a little bit like
winning. But it's not some objective standard that
says you have been victorious in the game. It's someone else has told you that you
did a good job. That's fun. That feels good whether or not it means
you've won the game. Triumphing. Now, here I'm talking about something that
is similar to winning but that has a particular aspect of it which is,
you win and someone else loses. Vanquishing your opponent. Some people find that independently fun,
above and beyond the joy of winning, the notion that you've
crushed someone else. Collecting. We find it fun to assemble things together
into collections. That's why some people love to collect
antiques or certain categories of objects and we find this
more generally in games when people have an opportunity to
assemble a bunch of things, even if that's not an express
objective of the game. People do it voluntarily because they find
it fun. Surprise. There is something fun about being
surprised. Why do we love surprise parties? Because the idea of surprise, of some novelty, something we didn't expect, is
independently fun. And this will tie in later on, when I
start to talk about psychology. The way that our brain actually releases
the chemical dopamine when something is unexpected and the reward that we get
is one that we didn't anticipate. More so than if it's the same reward that
we expected. Imagination. Daydreaming is fun. Just thinking about ideas and imagining
something in your head has an element of fun in and of
itself. Sharing, being altruistic is fun. People feel good when they give money to
charity. Again, something that we are hard wired to
think about as a species. Now, it doesn't mean that every time we
share, it's fun, and everyone shares everything
all the time. Anyone who has kids knows that getting
them to share is not always an easy task but there is an element of fun in the act of altruism or sharing or giving someone a
gift. Role playing. We love trying on roles, we love pretending that we're someone else
inhabiting another character. Whether that's all the way at the level of a role playing game where we are playing a
night elf druid or something to that effect, to
the more lightweight ideas of imagining
ourselves in someone else's shoes. Customization. It's fun to be able to make something our
own. It's fun to be able to decide exactly the
color that you want for every aspect of the Nike
shoes that you buy. We love to be able to personalize and
customize things. And finally, goofing off. There's something fun about just letting
it all hang out. About exploring the opportunity to just be
silly. Alright, so think about, for a game or for
a business process or some objective that you can imagine, or perhaps some of the ones that we've already covered in the
course. How you might use the different kinds of
fun that we've identified to produce an emotional
response, to engage people in the activity, and then next, we'll look a
little bit more systematically about how game
designers understand the concept of fun.