# 2.5 Just a Game?

Hopefully by now I've impressed upon you,
the significance of games in general and video games in particular. But it's still worth talking
about the concept that, many people have in their head when they
hear about something like gamification. Which is the assumption that games
are somehow trivial, insignificant, not serious, not worthy of thought,
when we're talking about business, or we're talking about major
importance serious kinds of objectives. So let me confront that in several ways,
before we leave the topic of games. The first is to point out the connection,
between video games and gamification as well,
to many of the core trends in both the technology world as
well as business in general. So when we talk about e-business and
e-commerce, many of the important developments
are things like analytics. Getting dashboards, using big data
to pull together very very rich, detailed data sets about, individual
users and their activities online. That's also a core element of games. If you think about social
game companies like Zynga, they are constantly doing AB testing
to try and try out different things. Constantly collecting data on every interaction that their
users have with the game. And shaping the experience
based on that data. And in many ways,
that is the future of video games. And also a very important element
of effective gamification. Because gamification relies
as well on that data. People interacting with the systems
generate very rich data sets, which can be mined to understand how to
make the gamified system more effective. Cloud. So a big trend right now is
the growth of massive data centers, that do processing and storage centrally,
as opposed to on local computers, and therefore can take
advantage of efficiencies and massive scale processing power. Cloud is also a huge
development in the games world. As we move from games downloaded and
put in a box, and put on a CD or DVD in someone's computer,
to games delivered across the network. Increasingly games become cloud-like. And gamification,
like any web-based system, can be delivered using
the same infrastructure. And finally mobile. I already talked about mobile games like
Angry Birds, huge growth rate, huge rate of development in sophistication, with
the growth of smartphones and tablets. The games industry is going towards
mobile, just like everything else. The second one here is social. As I've talked about,
games are powerfully social. And video games are also
powerfully social. And all of the techniques
of using social networks, leveraging the social graph, and
getting insights about people, and making experiences richer and
move valuable, using those social tools. All of that is also deeply embedded
in the video games industry today, and the direction that the video
games industry is going. And similarly something to be taken
advantage of in gamification. So, those are two digital
building blocks for gamification. Two non-digital building blocks. The first is loyalty programs. Things like frequent flyer miles or
credit card reward programs. Massive industry, 2 billion reward
program memberships in the US alone. Roughly $50 billion of
rewards outstanding. Huge numbers. Now part of the reason that those
loyalty programs are valuable, is all those rewards don't get redeemed. But clearly there is something going on
here, when virtually every travel company, and virtually every financial services,
credit card type company, uses some sort of rewards
program in their business. As we'll talk about, these loyalty
programs don't go far enough, in some of the ways that gamification can. They don't leverage fun and progression in these game dynamics,
nearly to the full extent. And they also have all sorts of problems,
in terms of being manipulative and not necessarily serving
the users interest. But, they provide some foundation for
understanding how, game mechanics. Things like points, and levels, and
representations of achievement, like badges. Have value and
can be used in a business context. And similarly, if you look at many of
the important theories in management, in areas like organizational behavior, and work design as well as key theories in
marketing about customer segmentation, and customer analytics, all of them fit
very neatly into the games industry today. But in particular into gamification. So we're not talking about things here, that are divorced from what you might
learn about in a digital marketing course. Or in a digital strategy course. We're talking about things
that are very much in line, of all those kinds of developments. Second piece here is that games,
video games I mean, and the real world are coming closer together. On the one hand,
games are becoming increasingly real, by moving the real world into the game. So I talked about serious
games simulations. This that you see on the screen
here is one called, America's Army. It's a first person shooter, realistic 3D
game for being a soldier in the US army. And it is produced by the US Army. Why? Recruiting. Getting people aware of what being in the
army entails, encouraging people to get familiar with and get excited about,
the process on being in the army. And to some extent, weeding out people
who are not right for the army. Because they have a misunderstanding
about, the skills and the character traits that it requires. Most successful recruiting tool
in the army's history, they say. And it's a video game. So this and many other things,
are about taking the real world and putting it into games. The reverse is also happening. Games are coming to the real world. I've already alluded to
a variety of examples. One of them has to do
with these virtual goods. So you recall I talked about, the multi-billion dollar
industry around virtual goods. But there's also a gray market
industry that's called gold farming. People playing games
like World of Warcraft. Where the player has to generate gold and
use the gold to buy things. And the gold can be traded with other
players, on an auction house or something like that. It turns out that if you run a company in,
say China, where wages are much lower than the US, you can employ a bunch
of people to play World of Warcraft. Eight, ten, 12 hours a day. Acquire gold, and
then take the gold that they've collected, and the valuable assets in the game,
turn them around and sell them through a group of middlemen,
to people in the West. And they will pay real money for
that gold. And the real money they will pay, will be
more than at the other end of the chain, which you have to pay the people playing
the game to accumulate the gold. Estimates are that there
are at least 100,000, perhaps as many as
400,000 people in China, who make their living playing games
like World of Warcraft as gold farmers. Again, typically working for
these intermediary companies. It's a multi-billion dollar
gray market industry. That's an example of something
that comes out of games. The gold isn't real, it's totally virtual
and yet it has real value to people. Up here I put a screenshot of
the cover of a book called, Play Money by my friend Julian Dibbell. If you're interested in gold farming and
virtual goods, Julian has been covering this for years. And the book is about his own experiences,
trading virtual assets for real money. The final piece here is that,
when we ask are games real? Or do they matter in the real world? It's actually a false question. Because if you go out and look at many
phenomena in the world through the lens of gameification, it turns out
they're already game-like. So what is the monthly sales
competition between a sales force? First prize is a car,
second prize is steak knives, third prize is a pink slip or
something like that. What is that, but a challenge? A competitive challenge. If you get the most sales in this month,
you get a prize. What is a frequent flyer program? A loyalty program,
which I've already talked about, but a set of points that then levels
you up to go from an ordinary plebeian Individual on a plane,
to a premier flyer, to a premier executive flyer,
to a global services customer, the top tier on United Airlines,
is about leveling up in a game. Only the game is called
the frequent flyer program. Weight Watchers groups. One of the reasons that Weight Watchers
is successful in getting people to lose weight,
is that it puts people together in a team. Your sharing information
with other people, as opposed to just doing it on your own. The free coffee after ten purchases at
any local retailer, well that's a reward. You get various things. There's also things like
completion mechanics there. But ultimately, it's about rewarding
people for their practices. And another example,
the American Express card. Here we have the levels, but here I want to point out things like
the Platinum Card, is a representation. It says, hey I am important. I've reached this point by virtue
of my spending in the program. And that Platinum Card itself in
gamification, we call a badge. So none of these are foreign
concepts when you think about them. Gamification is just about using them and
applying them in a systematic way, given all of the power that we have
with these digital technologies.