# 10.3 Social Impact Techniques

Here are some of the techniques
that can be used particularly in context of gamification for
social good. And I'll illustrate each of them with
reference to a real world example. The first example is something called
CAPRI, which stands for Congestion and Parking Relief Initiatives. It's a project at Sanford that's
being developed by a professor named Belagi Provocar and his team, based
on some work they've done in other places. And the issue here is parking spots
fill up on campus at Stanford, the roads get congested because most
people who are driving onto campus, show up at the same time, and
leave around the same time. That's why it's called rush hour. This is of course not at all
unique to Stanford, and so what the team did was come up with
a system to incentivize people, motivate them,
use game rewards and so forth, to spread out their arrival and
departure and parking patterns. And at some level it works like the other
kinds of gamified system that we've seen, so it uses the standard approaches
of feedback and rewards. You see here this meter,
which shows how many points you've earned. Here's how many points, level 30,
the person has earned this week. Here's their level that they
have gotten to, level silver and you see this graphically represented here. And that provides some feedback and
that feedback then ties into rewards. And here you see $25, you get
a monetary reward and a set of credits, points every time you park at some
time outside of the rush hour period. So that's the first element of this which,
again, looks like many of the other
examples that we've seen. But here's some interesting areas
that are a little bit different. The first one has to do with monitoring. So how does this information get recorded? It gets recorded automatically. Because users of the system use
smartphones with GPS that are tied into a system that can track automatically
what time you arrive and where you arrive. There's no need to go and type in and
self-report what you did. This is a particular challenge for
social impact gamification. It's a challenge for
all kinds of gamification but if we're talking about commercial context,
usually there's some existing transaction. It's you at work where you're monitored by
the corporate systems that you're using. Or it's you visiting
a website of a company, that's then able to track you that way. With many of these social impact type
applications that involve behavior change, a big challenge is
getting people to report. You've got to describe what you ate. You've got to describe what kind
of energy usage you engaged in. And that's a hurdle. So more and more sensors are being
used to track, automatically, what people are doing. Obviously, this raises privacy and
other issues. It needs to be done in a way that is
transparent that allows the users to at least opt-out and
probably opt-in and so forth. But if it's done right, then that's very powerful to encourage
participation in the system. Third one is the subtle
use of communal pressure. So you see down here the use of friends. You can see not only what you're doing but some information about your friends and
their parking behavior within the system. Earlier on I gave the example of Opower
and showed how they give you reports that say this is how your power usage
compares to your neighbors. And, what that does is it activates
some very powerful social norms. It's not necessarily
about competition per se, it's about social norms that,
you don't wanna be, too far out of line, with your community,
your neighbors or your friends. Creates a kind of subtle
pressure which may be healthy to get people to conform and
to get people to engage in that behavior. So, those are some techniques
that this service uses which are particularly interesting
in the social good context. The next technique is competition. So, as I said,
purely showing you what your friends did creates a subtle pressure but
it's not about beat your friends. Now certainly we can use, or
these systems can use, a leaderboard. And some of them do for the express kind of competition
against either others or friends. But there is also the potential to
make the entire process a competition. What I'm showing you here is
something called the Kukui Cup, which is a project at
the University of Hawaii at Manoa. Where some professors there
have developed a system to create a competition among students in the
residence halls, in different floors and sections of the residence halls,
to see which one uses the least power, which one is the most efficient in
their sustainable use of energy. And it's got all of the usual
kinds of gamefication elements that we see as well
as a big educational section. Here are the points and so forth. But the big issue here,
the big thing that I want to highlight, is it's a competition. So the entire process is built
around trying to win and do better than your peers. That's something that can be used
in other contexts of course, but it has particular value in social impact. Because the danger of focusing
too much on competition in the context of commercial
gamification is that it pushes people to compete as opposed to
focusing on doing well at their job. Or focusing on understanding the product
that they are going to buy, and having a long-term engaging
relationship with the company. Competition can result in this zero sum
relentless focus on the competition, which is bad. Here there's no external existing kind
of structure where this is your job. The competition is about
trying to take pride in winning but to get you to something
that again, you want to do. To get this group of students,
for example, to use less energy. So the competition has less
potential to be dangerous, and more potential to be an added motivator
that just sweetens the pot if you will, and helps people get
to the desired result. The next one is impact. If you are visiting a company's
website you probably don't care that much if your engagement
is producing more sales or some additional marketing benefits for
the company. But if you are involved in some kind of
social impact activity, you as the user, the player may care a lot to find
out just what impact you're having, what good you're doing for the world. So, there's an opportunity to
leverage that feedback effect of seeing the ultimate results of
collective activity on the site and turning that around and
using that to further motivate people. So for example, this is a screenshot
from a company called Practically Green. Susan Hunt Stevens, who is the CEO of the company,
is going to do an interview with me later. So I'll let her tell you
about what the company does. But basically, they motivate
sustainability types of actions by people. And you see here, one of the things
that they show on this page is what the consequences
are of your activity. How much energy you've saved,
how much fuel you've saved, how much waste you've avoided, water,
trees, emissions, and, if you're doing this within a company, you can see
those metrics for the entire company. Look at all the good that we
have done by using this service. That can be a powerful motivator above and beyond the direct motivational
pull of the gamified system. Seeing what you're doing can make
a big difference in getting people to do more of it, if the objective is
something that they feel is a social good. Finally there's an interesting
opportunity to use chance. This is back to the CAPRI system, the
parking system at Stanford, and what this system does is, remember it gives you
either dollars of rewards or credits. And the idea of the credits is
that you can use the credits, not to redeem them for different kinds
of tangible rewards, but to play a game. To play this basic kind of chutes and
ladders game where you have a chance of a bigger reward, but
it's random, it's not guaranteed. You give up your certain reward and
you might get less depending on where you come out on this,
you get different kinds of outcomes. But you might also get a lot more. You might have a big kind of payoff. This is a lottery type of system,
and people love it. The system has embedded in
it also some skill based or performance based elements, namely
that depending on your status level. You'll recall there was member,
silver and gold and so forth levels, based on how much people were
parking at the desirable times. Depending on where you are on that scale,
you get a better board. HIgher levels give you a bigger
chance of winning bigger prizes. So there's some incentive. It's not purely by chance. But once you get to the end of that
process, if you choose to use this system, your reward is potentially
randomly determined. And it turns out that people actually
love this, that they generally prefer this opportunity to get a much bigger
reward potentially, but not guaranteed. And this ties in to lots of findings in
behavioral economics and so forth and ties in to the example I gave way back in the
beginning of the class of the speed camera lottery and how a game-like system of
a lottery can actually promote behavior. This system CAPRI, as I said,
is based on some prior work. The preliminary trial that
was done in Bangalore, India found that they were able
to double the number of cars in the test area that were parking earlier
or later than the rush hour period. And I trial in Singapore found at least
a 10% impact on overall traffic patterns. And 10% may not seem like much. But traffic is a non-linear thing. A small consistent increase in the number
of cars on the road in a particular place, will lead to a big increase
in congestion and traffic. And so
10% can actually make a huge difference in terms of avoiding
some of those impacts.