# 11.1 Pointsification

The promise of gamefication is to learn
from games, to draw on what makes games so powerful and apply
it in other contexts. So it's a fair question to ask whether gamifcation can or in fact does actually
accomplish that. And there are many who argue that it
doesn't. This criticism goes by the name of
pointsification, a term that was coined by Margaret Robertson, a British Game
Developer in her blog Hide and Seek. And in her original post back in 2010,
what she argued and what many others have since developed
in other ways, is that gamification is about taking the
thing that is least essential from games and representing it as the core
of the experience. In other words, gamification relies just
on the surface aspects of games, the mechanics, the other
game elements. And what she says is, that's not the
important stuff. That's not the part of games that makes
them wonderful. That gets people to play and that
stimulates that powerful set of motivational aspects that we've
talked about in the course. So what she says is, as she goes on in the post, effectively gamification is
an inadvertent con. It's genuine. It's trying to take something valuable
from games, but it's taking the wrong thing. And in so doing, it's inadvertently
misleading people. It's suggesting to people that what's
great about games is that they have things like point
systems and leaderboards. When in fact, that's not what's central
and important about games at all. And there's a great deal of bite to this
criticism. As we talked about, many gamified rely
principally on points, badges, leaderboard, and a few other
surface level game mechanics. And, while that may have some valuable
effect, and we can link them to other sorts of
activities like loyalty programs, they don't
necessarily produce the sense of true engagement, and the sense of
intrinsic motivation. That's so important to really changing behavior, and to really producing
sustained results in ways that are beneficial for people who
are involved in the system. So, there is a legitimate criticism here
around pointsification, but to my mind it's one that can be addressed by
thinking about gamification more broadly. As I've talked about, there really are two streams of work that feed into
gamification. The one that Robertson and the other
critics are talking about when they bael it pointsification is
entirely on the behavioral side. And it's the shallower aspects of applying those behavioral techniques
through gamification. Again, predominantly using simple
mechanics like points and leaderboards. And thinking that they can just be slapped
onto processes, and produce results. I would certainly agree that that's
limiting and that that doesn't produce the same kinds of powerful results that we
can see from games. But gamification at least appropriately
thought of is much more than that. So, part of the criticism of
pointsification is focusing in on the limited set, but a very real set of
gamification examples and practices. And I think that we can take it to heart without necessarily writing off the
entire practice of gamification. But an important question this raises is
whether gamification really is effective. Robertson, as a game designer, was
concerned about gamification having the effect of
belittling games. That if people started to think, oh wait,
games are just about points and badges and stuff
like that, and those really aren't that
effective, so therefore games must not be that interesting or
powerful either. As a game designer, that was her concern. She wasn't particularly concerned about
gamification as a practice but those of us who are in the gamification
field certainly are. And, so, it's worth asking whether if
gamification reduces to pointsification, then that means that
it won't produce the kind of sustained important deep
engagement that's necessary to drive real business results and real
behavior change. And the challenge here is we don't have a
tremendous amount of research. In this course, I've given you many different examples, some anectodatal some
involving data points, but we don't have yet significant
empirical research systematically looking at
different forms of gamification. And the results that it can provide in the enterprise, in external marketing context,
in behavior change context. There are social scientists, people like
my colleague Ethan Mollick here at the Wharton School, who've started to
do research in this area. And I think that we'll see research start to come about that informs
gamification practice. But up to this point, it's limited. I think there's enough examples, again,
we've seen many of them in this course, that suggest that these techniques are
valid and can work if designed and applied
appropriately. But we dont yet know as much as we need to about what the data really show in large
scale practical deployments. The second issue that this comes to, is
that gamification if it does reduce to
pointsification, if most of the time, or at least some of the time, it turns out to just be about using these
shallow elements. There's a very real risk that engagement
may spike initially, but will then decay. That people may feel that initial boost
from the surprise or the activity and engagement loops of
feedback. But ultimately, if they're just driven by those behavior risked rewards, or just
driven by the surface level mechanics, they'll
get bored, and that won't produce an enduring
response. That's I think a fair criticism and something to be aware of in designing
gamified systems, and yet another reason not to
just stop by thinking about these simple
points-based mechanics. The third aspect of this is one that we
already talked about which is the potential for
crowding out or over-justification. If, in fact, gamification becomes just pointsification, then it falls victim to
all the dangers of extrinsic rewards that I described in some of the psychology
sections. All of this together is what is led Kathy
Sierra whose a noted author and speaker around interaction design, and
programming and other areas. She has been a frequent critic of
gamification and has labeled it I think very powerfully as the high
fructose corn syrup of engagement. And what I think she's saying there is,
first of all, that it takes the richness, the
real organic value of games and of human
engagement and reduces it down to something very
simplistic and very shrill. And that it's something like corn syrup
high fructose corn syrup that seems great
because it's sweet and cheap but that, as we learn more, turns out to be potentially harmful
for us. In the sense here that if we rely too much
on these simplistic external reward-based systems, that it will push
people away from the true intrinsic motivation, love of the
activity, love of the task, love of the process that is what should
ultimately should be driving them. And as with the pointification critique
more broadly, this is something that's worth taking into
account. Now, again, I tend to to think that it's not a fatal critique of all of
gamification. For the reasons that I described in the course, but it's something that you should
always have in mind when designing systems and always
try to think about how to avoid sliding down that
path. Where in fact, what you're doing is not gamifying, but just applying point
systems. Or applying game mechanics and other game elements in situations where they're not
truly appropriate. So let's turn back to the Foursquare
example. Foursquare in many ways was a tremendous
success story for gamification. The use of game elements, the badges, the
points, and so forth, on top of the social location system that was pioneered
by Dodgeball, helped power Foursquare to tremendous
success and tremendous adoption. But along the way something interesting
happened. Early in 2012, Foursquare did a redesign. They changed the interface of the system
in a way that appeared to signficantly
deemphasize the game elements. So here you see some screen shots of the Foursquare iPhone client, and you see here
is one main screen that shows information about
your friends and were they are, and information that you
can post. And you notice, not a lot of game elements
actually there. And here's the screen showing your
friends, where they've checked in on the map. Again, the game elements aren't that
prominent. It's only when you get to this third
screen here that we see the stats with the crown. We see the badges that you've accompli,
that you've achieved, and so forth. So, the game elements are still there,. But they appear to be much less prominent. So the question is what lesson to draw
from this. And I think one can draw a couple of
different lessons. One conclusion is gamification didn't
work. The game elements either didn't actually produce business results, or maybe they
did for a while, but then people got bored,
people got tired of them. The badges just became something silly and
not something that really motivated people to want to check in and
participate in the service. Or maybe, another conclusion that one
could draw, is that the game elements are still there and still
important to the service. But it was much more important to make them prominent during the early days when
Foursquare was trying to grow, trying to get out of
that trap that I described early on. Where there was no reason for people to check in if their friends weren't checking
in. And there were no real super users who had
a motivation to go and check in all the time in certain
locations, and post information. So perhaps the game elements were
particularly important during that growth phase for the
company. And now that it's reached a critical mass,
where the key is monetization and building out off of
the large number of users, to real rich informational and social
value that people can extract out, and that gets people to put more, deep
information into the system. Maybe at that point, the point badge and leaderboard type game elements are
less central. So you can decide whichever of those
stories you think persuades you, or maybe some
other story. But again, in thinking about gamification
in practice, it behooves everyone to try to keep questioning whether this is a
technique that's worth using. I think it's one that can be extremely
valuable in many different areas. Going from very light weight systems to
much more sophisticated deployments. But, it's again not something that's
useful for everyone. And not something that's useful in every
single case. So, what are some implications to take
away from this discussion? First, names are powerful. Much of the fire behind the criticism of
gamification from game designers hinges on the word gamification, because
it implies that this is about games. And I think if you think about it broadly
as I've talked about, it is. It involves using many different aspects
of games and many different aspects of game design
practice. But it's true that if gamification is just
pulling out points, and a few other mechanics, then it's something
substantially less than the full panoply of richness that games
entail. So names matter. The problem is, names are memes. And gamification is the meme that is
stuck, maybe, eventually, it will go away, or change
into something else. But for now it's the word that gets used
for this practice. Second point is bad gamification is bad. So it's true that if gamification just uses points, badges, and leaderboards,
especially if it does it in a very shallow way, and certainly there are many examples of that
today. That it's going to be limited. It's not going to produce sustained
engagement. And it may, in fact, be harmful. It may, in fact, produce the kind of
backlash, the crowding out effect, that we described in the discussion of
behaviorism and psychology. Third point is that there's more to games
than gamification. So, games do involve many other aspects
beyond the ones that we talked about in this
class. And there's more to gamification than
games. Gamification draws upon areas like
psychology, and design, and business practice, and social
media in many ways that go beyond or go in different directions than game design and
that's fine. That's one reason it's important to keep
straight whether we're talking about games,
including for example, serious game design, or talking about gamification
where the goal is to apply it to some non-game
context. And final lesson here, caveat ludor. Let the gamifier beware. Make sure to always keep in mind the
difference between gamification and pointsification, and to recognize the
bite that bad criticism has.