# 11.3 Gaming the Game

There are many mistakes that you can make
in designing a gamified system. But one of the most common and the most
dangerous is to forget about who the object of the system is,
namely, the players. And to forget that players are people,
they're human beings, they're thinking and feeling
and interacting agents. And while you can anticipate, in many
ways, how they're going to behave. And you can certainly anticipate the
different kinds of motivational structures that might push them in one
direction or another. You can never be sure what they're going
to do. And in designing gamified systems, it's
critical to recognize that one thing that players may do is game the
system. They may turn the tables on you and do something that you never expected and
never intended. Sometimes this can be dangerous, not just
for you, but for them. Nicole Lazzaro, the game designer who
developed the concept of four types of fun, gives a great example in her presentations which she calls gamification
can kill. And the example is, the on ramp to the San Francisco Bay Bridge, maybe it's the
Golden Gate Bridge. But, It's one of the bridges in San
Francisco, California. And, like many urban transit systems, they have a system for pricing that's
congestion based. The price goes up during rush hour to try
to encourage people to go across the bridge
at less busy times. So you see here at 6:59, I think this must
be p.m., it's six bucks to go over the bridge but
at seven, a minute later, it's only four bucks to go
over the bridge. Great. Incentive system. You could call it a gamified system. You could call it behavioral economics. It certainly encourages people to drive
during off hours. What's the problem? The problem, Lazzaro points out, is if you
drive towards the bridge at 6:59 p.m., you will see a whole bunch of people
swerving off the road. Trying to park on the side because they
know that if they wait just a minute or two more to go over the
bridge, it's $2 less. The problem is, what this is incentivizing
people to do is, to swerve dangerously off the road in ways that might cause them
to get into an accident. And so that's the point about Gamification
Can Kill. We have to realize how people are going to
respond to the systems. They may very well react to the prompts that are given, not necessarily in the
ways that are anticipated or even too much in the way that is, that are, the ways that
anticipated. And that can be dangerous. Now, one dimension of this is a recognition that sometimes people will
cheat. That sometimes people will figure out a
way to achieve their own aims in the system that are not the aims
of the game designer. Maybe there is some flaw in the game that
lets people accumulate vast numbers of points for a
small amount of work. And if that option is there, many people
will take it. Now, as I talked about part of what makes
a game a game is that the players have to voluntarily
accept the rules of the game. That often there are opportunities to
cheat in the game, but we don't do them because if we do them, we're following the rules, we are
not playing the game, we're just doing
something else entirely. And the people around us, our opponent,
the other participants won't even recognize that
we're playing the game. But, in gamified systems, where we're dealing with people interacting with
computer based software systems, often, even though
they're in a social context, they're interacting
individually. It's often easy for people to feel like
the game that they're playing Is one that
allows them to bend the rules or make their own rules in ways that the game designer would
consider cheating. Interestingly enough, well designed games
that have social elements tend to see this last, because the social
pressure, whether explicit or implicit, is enough to
get people not to cheat even in ways that they could. But even there, there is the potential, if
the rewards are great enough or the incentive is great enough, that
people may try to cut corners. And this is something that, depending on
the nature of the system, maybe the game designer will
just live with. Or maybe it is something that the game
needs to be expressly built with the anticipation
that people act that way. This is a big reason why iteration and
play testing is so critical in designing games as well as
an effective gamification design because you can never be sure what exactly
people are going to do until you get them in and see them
actually doing it. In some cases though, cheating may be a
virtue, it may actually help achieve results that the
game designer was thinking about. How can that be, well let me give you one
example. James Gardener is an innovation designer,
who now works for a company called Spigot that makes a gamified
prediction market system that can be used in companies to develop innovations by creating contests where people bet real
money, or virtual goods that potentially are translatable into real money, on new
ideas. And he's been part of teams that had
developed these types of system, in many different
kinds of contexts. Originally in England. He famously developed the idea street
program at the Department of Welfare and Pensions in the U.K. but before that he
did it for Lloyds bank. And something interesting happened at
Lloyds bank where they created an innovation
market. So, this was a market place where you came
up with ideas that would be helpful motivations for the bank
and people could buy and sell those innovations and people could get together
in teams to develop the innovation and the market would determine which were the
more popular and the more successful ones. And then the company would take the most
successful ones and try to implement them. And they found, in this and other cases,
lots of amazing results in implementing the ideas that bubble to the
top through this prediction market place. But something interesting happened at
Lloyds when they applied this gamiified system,
insider trading. People realized that they could find the
good ideas and go and join up with those
groups. And be able to buy and sell with the ideas that were rising and successful in
the system. In financial markets, insider trading is a
danger, it's cheating. It's a form of fraud because it's using information that you have that other
people don't have, it undermines trust in the
financial markets, that's a reason that's it's often
prosecuted. But, in this gamified system, this kind of virtual insider trading was not about, but
actually a feature, because it was a way of strengthening and growing the teams around
the great ideas. And it was a way of reinforcing, providing
additional signal value around the ideas that people thought
had great potential. Which is what the gamified system was
about. It was not about making money for people,
or making money for companies that were issuing securities, it was about
finding and developing great ideas, and
reinforcing them. So, the gaming of the game by the
participants as Gardner realized, was actually something
that helped achieve that result. In all of these cases, again, the critical
piece is to recognize that people will act in unpredictable, sometimes
spontaneous ways in response to the signals that the system
produces. And so, part of game design is building in
structures that first of all ensure that those activities, if they're unanticipated, don't destroy
the game. Don't create imbalances or otherwise make
the game unplayable or undesirable for a large segment of the
players. And ideally create systems so that they
help the game. So that even though people aren't doing
what the game designer expressly told them to, they're exercising
their autonomy, and therefore feeling more intrinsically motivated in the activity,
and doing things that get to the same result that the gamification system was originally designed to
accomplish.