# 4.5 Bing Gordon Interview

Our final segment this week is an
interview with our first guest speaker. Bing Gordon is a longtime major figure in
the video game industry. He was chief creative officer of
Electronic Arts, one of the top games companies
worldwide. He's now a partner at Kleiner Perkins, a leading venture capital firm in Silicon
Valley. In full disclosure, Kleiner Perkins is one
of the investors in Corsera. But the reason I wanted to talk to Bing is that he's also a major advocate for
gamification. So our conversation touches upon some of
the things that we've already covered in the class, and alludes to some of the
topics that we're going to cover. Let's hear it. Bing, thanks a lot for joining us. >> Great to be here. This is probably the easiest classroom
session I've ever had. >> Well, just wait and see. I haven't started asking you you questions
yet. >> Well, if I were in my pajamas this
would be even better. I'm going to I'm going to take a little
picture of that. >> [LAUGH] You've said that you think every start up
CEO should understand gamefication. Why is that? >> I think every CEO, not just start up
CEOs should understand gamefication. There's a couple of reasons, the first is
it's the new normal for people born after 1971 to see life as games, to be used to
the interface, used to some of the rules. So if you want to have employees who were born after 1971, or customers who were
born after 1971, you need to understand how they
think and the lens through which they see the
world. The second thing is, there's a bunch of
principles, of of game design. That underscore and improve all kinds of
communication and motivation theory. So if you manage it as a CEO, your job is
to inspire customers. Or to inspire and communicate with
employees. There's a bunch of principles in game
design that are useful. So the, you know, the reason is to
understand gamification is to be an effective, effective with your
customers, effective with your employees. And even be able to test your
effectiveness. Be one of the principles of gamification
is instant feedback. And we can all we can all remember times
when we wished from teachers, or parents, or significant others, or
supervisors, bosses, to get instant feedback, and it's one of the things that
games are great at, is instant, tangible feedback, which is
different than hey, how am I doing? [SOUND] That's great, you know, a game
would say, you know, plus three relationship points in
The Sims, or, you know, plus 200 experience points
in World of Warcraft, or would you know drop a drop a
blue. And you say okay, that's real feedback,
and if we get the same kind of precision and feedback in life that we get in games
we would like ourselves better. >> [LAUGH] So then where should someone go
to figure out what those rules are and how they would apply to their situation, other
than taking this course of course? >> Well taking the course. There's no books. You know, there's books on game making. But not so much on game principles. Robert Trent Jones, a golf course
designer, has some pretty good principles. Like, a golf course should look hard and
play easy. And then you should have risk return on
courses that if you want to try to get a birdie, a high risk,
versus getting a par. So you could, you can read probably blogs
and thinkings of interaction designers. I think the easiest way is to play a great
game. So, I think every Fortune 500 company
should have a video game room in its executive
suite. Maybe somebody who's spent 1000 hours on
World of Warcraft. Or has gotten to a real high level in
Battlefield. Or you know, has hundreds of achievements
on Xbox Live. Their because the things that are working
in the best games are, are the best principles, you know,
nobody's written them down in one place, but game-makers tend to try to borrow
breakthroughs from one another. >> Mm-hm. >> [CROSSTALK] In World of Warcraft we
know how hard it is to get people to cooperate. In the party system, with the overlapping
buffs in World of Warcraft. It just, it's, the best example of an
incentive system to work together with strangers, and it's so good that the
culture of World of Warcraft has been pickup groups can play together, they
understand the rules of behavior, and they don't even have to chat if they don't want
to, everybody knows the rules. And there's sociologist psychologists who
talked about kind of the, the pay it forward mechanism
that seems inherent in all human cultures that where people
reward good behavior, punish bad behavior. Well, that's, you know that no
psychologist should put a number on it. Well in World of Warcraft, you can
actually count that if you have a party with four other people that we're all
buffing each other how much more effective you
are. And my my civil principle is I should a game-maker should organize the map so if
you're in a small party, you average about 20% more
effective. Maybe the same thing's true with good
marriage, if you're if you're married well, you should have a
20% better life. [BLANK_AUDIO] >> Sounds good to me. And you gotta have a lot of instantaneous
feedback there too. >> [LAUGH] Yeah. >> So
>> Does my butt look good in these jeans? >> [LAUGH]. >> Yeah, there's some feedback you don't
necessarily want, fair enough. [CROSSTALK] So you- >> Plus two for Gryffindor. >> Right. [LAUGH] So, I know you work at Kleiner
Perkins with start ups. And you try to teach some of them about
how to apply gamification. Are there things that you find that they
consistently misunderstand about it? >> There are two mistakes that civilians
typically make. One is that they think that the primary motivation of games is winning
competition. And, in fact, we've seen again and again that cooperation trumps
competition three-to-one. And then the, the, the second place that
they tend to put their efforts is on kind of a high
score. listing, high score ranking. And in fact, for most people, high score
rankings are demotivating. One principle of gamification is you only
get motivated when you're 90% of the way to
success. So if there's a ring of 1,000 people and
you're not within that top 10% you tend to tune
out. So gamification, principle of gamification
are to increase engagement. Not just increase the opportunities for
trash talk. >> Mm-hm. >> Well so that, that links into one of
the things I was going to ask you about. That people sometimes look at examples of
gamification and look at examples of social games companies like Zinga and say
basically, oh that's just a cheap trick. We can see how they get people hooked for
a little bit. But ultimately it's just going to wear
off. And with Zinga, which is one of your
portfolio companies, people point to how their stock has gone down
since their IPO. And say, oh this is just a fad. How do you respond to that? >> I wouldn't separate the two things out,
you know, business. You know the ups and downs of businesses
are you know, kind of legendary, been going on
forever. The the, the principles of games you know, of using, using numbers and mechanics to
improve. Motivation I'd say, have been going on for
a long time, and the, you know, giving people rewards,
we've been doing it in school with grades, and grades are kind of
the gammification of the education system. and, you know, you do it with Facebook,
seeing how many friends you can get, and with Twitter, how many
friends you can get. So the Janet Murray at Georgia Tech thinks
that, that play is the great accelerator of of kind of
human culture. That the the creation of the human culture can't be explained by the size of the
cortex. So I think the gamification is the kind of
fun way to apply communication theory. And communication theory has been
something that humans have cared about since, you know, cave drawings
and probably since Adam and Eve. You know, and that, that Adam and Eve story, that, that shows one of the things
that Will Wright used as a principle of game design which is you have to have great
failures. And I think what people say about Dante is that in story telling, you have to have
great villains. Well, you know, tantalizing people with
great failure, like actually eating the apple of knowledge,
and causing human downfall. And reality TV shows. You know, it's just, to say that's
probably going to get old. You know? I think that's unlikely. So, since the beginning of culture, there
have been many of these things that we've used as
heuristics are not algorithms. So the, the games are, are polarizing. However, there's some people who react
poorly to extrinsic results. But when I was growing up. Most people in America reacted poorly to numbers on the surface of consumer
products. Except for baseball fans. You know, baseball fans, statistics were
invented by newspapers as a way to try to get people to buy newspapers back
in the turn of the century. And baseball numbers were cool. And all economists and my heroes started
out as baseball fans. But there were numbers nowhere else,
except maybe on the gas pump. And so civilians don't realize that boys
and girls are growing up with numbers on the surface of
Pokemon, and Neopets. And the numbers on the surface of The Sims, which is, you know, the first
packaged goods game that had more than 50% of the players being female and reach big
numbers. So the numbers as the new normal on the
surface of products is something that the gaming Luddites don't
realize. >> No, absolutely. And that ties back in, I think, to what you said earlier on about
generational change. People growing up with games. I find that I grew up playing video games,
but I watched my kids, and look at, at four and five and six, the
experience they have, and virtually all of the games now they're playing have badge systems, and achievements, and virtual
points, and virtual assets, and they're just comfortable with
this stuff, they think that's just the way things
work. >> Yeah, and it's going to put a lot of
pressure on the assembly line education process that got perfected
100 years ago. >> could have put a lot of pressure on a lot of things. >> [LAUGH]. >> [CROSSTALK] well, so let me ask you
one, one- >> I do, I do tell kids that, you know,
take heart. The game business was created by high
potential people who are bored with lectures and then lectures do become, kind
of, the center of many education systems, so the you know,
being bored in lectures is probably an indicator of
future success. >> [LAUGH] Well hopefully it's not true of anyone
that's bored of my lectures in this class. But I guess we'll see. >> Well, but in your class, they can be,
you know, if it gets a little bit slow, you can play a little Castleville, or Words With Friends on the
side. >> [LAUGH]
>> And the teacher won't be pissed. >> Absolutely not. So if this becomes the new normal, though,
and every company is using these techniques, where's the room for differentiation, for competitive
advantage? [BLANK_AUDIO] >> Well the nice thing about living in
Silicon Valley or being in the media business that innovations grow the whole
market, so it's not necessarily win lose. Let's see, if it becomes the new normal. I don't know, you know I think the the kids who've grown up digital we've seen it again and again and again,
they believe that the purpose of the world is to be the best version of
yourself you can be and that life is not hierarchical. So we're going to a peer to peer world. And, you know? If you can find ways to communicate more
effectively. Build relations more effectively. Learn more effectively. Why not, you know? 'because we probably only have 100 years
on, on the planet. And if you could we saved years by getting clear feedback,
or kind of being more motivated. Why not? >> Sounds great to me. Thanks a lot for for joining us. >> Okay, good luck, good luck to all the
students, hope they get plenty of chances through out test the wisdom of
grown-ups and find out where it's lacking. >> [LAUGH] Many places, absolutely, good
advice.