# 1.4 Why Study Gamification

So, why should we study gamification? Maybe I should ask you that, after all of
you signed up for this course, but it's worth pausing
for a minute and asking the question of why this is worth the kind of
extended analysis that we're going to do in this class, because
its, its just games, right? Well, there are four reasons I think the systematic study of gamification is
fruitful. And we're going to see more and more
gamification being a regular subject that's taught about, both in, training context and in, university
educational context. The first of these is that gamification is
a significant emerging business practice. We're seeing lots and lots of examples
come up from many different kinds of companies as well as in non-business context where gamification is
being applied. So here's just a couple examples from, the
recent press. An article from Fortune magazine from
October 2011. Talking about gamification as the hot new
business concept, and while I certainly wouldn't say just follow
something because it's a hyped trend the important thing is many of
them world's most admired companies are starting to get
on board with this. It's not just something that's happening
among kooky startups. It's something that's being adopted by
very large, established companies. The second article here from the Wall
Street Journal talking about how a growing number of firms are incorporating
elements of video games into the work place. So video games, as I'll talk about in more detail, have become a huge and
influential industry. But what we're starting to see is more and more examples of video games being the
foundation, not just for selling games, but for the foundation of doing things at and around
the workplace. So gamification is something that is
happening, and as I said, it's happening very widely. So here is a list of a few of the companies that are applying
gamification in substantial ways. And as you'll see, they range from small
very technology focused startups, to big very consumer products focused, established, bricks and mortar
companies. And some of these are companies that went
out consciously and tried to implement gamification around one of their
business practices, and some of them are companies that just developed something,
that in hindsight was game like, and they just, thought it was a good way to attack
a particular problem they had. But in both cases when we look at what's happening out there, there's a
growing recognition that this set of techniques has value, and it
has value in a, a very broad set of
circumstances. The second reason to think that
gamification is worth, greater scrutiny is that games are
powerful things. We've probably all had the experience of
saying wow, I was really addicted to that game or, you
know, time just seemed to fly by. And maybe it's a video game, maybe you had that experience with a, a board or a card
game. Maybe you had that experience playing
sports. But games have a real pull on us. There's something that is extremely
powerful when we think about it, given that we think of them as experiences that
are done just for enjoyment. So what is it that makes games engaging? What is it that allows games to support sophisticated kinds of thinking and
learning, as we'll see? What is it about games, that makes them so
engaging? That's an important question to ask. And it's a question that gets asked about, among the community of people who study
games in their own right, but it's a question that becomes relevant when the games are
being used, or at least the game elements and design principles are being used in these
non-game contexts, it's worth starting to dig down and say just what is it about games that's so
significant? The third reason to study gamification is
because it teaches us things about other areas of
knowledge as well. So, as we'll see when we get into gamification, we're going to very quickly
get into psychology. Games have been around throughout all of
human history because they link to some very basic aspects of the way
our minds work. And so to understand how to design things
that are effectively gamified, we need to
understand about, for example, motivation. What is it that makes someone want to do
something? What are different kinds of motivation? And what are different techniques that can be used to help people achieve their
goals? So we'll learn about psychology. We'll also learn about design. As I've already talked about, gamification
is a design practice. So understanding how to do it necessarily
gets us into thinking about the very sophisticated
complex world of design. strategy, I teach it at business school. And understanding gamification in the
organization ties into lots of things that people here talk about in
understanding how to do business, understanding what it means
to lead in the workplace, understanding what it means to
design an effective marketing campaign. These are all areas of knowledge that
we're going to bring to bear in understanding what
makes gamification work. And finally technology. games, as I've said, have been around
forever, and many games don't involve any specificated technology, but
the ability of today's network information
technology to create rich immersive personalized
experiences and to track interactions in real time, and aggregate and analyze them, and make use
of them is incredibly powerful when applied to gamification. So, most of the examples that we're going
to see are going to be examples in the world of online activities, whether online services or technology start-ups
the gamification is applied in a digital, internet-based
context, and so understanding what it is about that
environment that makes gamification successful will
provide a window into understanding aspects of
technology as well. And the final reason that we should study
gamification is that it's not that easy. It's not that obvious. Once you understand what gamification is,
you may think great, so I see that Nike plus uses challenges and awards
and trophies to get people to do stuff, well I'll just put
some challenges and trophies in my business practice, and
people will flock to it. Turns out, it's not that easy. Turns out that doing gamification well, doing gamification ethically, doing
gamification in a way that fits in with your ultimate long
term business objectives is not trivial. It requires thought, it requires recourse
through those various different areas of knowledge
that I talked about, and so this is something
that we can't just give you a cookbook. I can't just say, here's the list of game
elements, have at them. You need to understand them within a
broader context and that's exactly what this course is
intended to provide.