# 12.4 Collective Action

Gamification can be a very powerful
technique for collective action, for motivating and
encouraging large numbers of people to come together and
work on a common task or set of tasks. I already talked about something related
to this when I described Stack Overflow and showed how
the gamification design for that site encouraged pro social and, in
some cases, collaborative behavior, like people commenting and
responding on each others questions. But, what if you have a specific
objective. Stack Overflow is designed to be a forum for people learning about and getting
better at programming. What if you have a task that you want to
solve and you want to employ the energy and ideas and enthusiasm
of a large number of people towards it? There are a number of different scenarios
where this might be the case. Some of them we've actually already looked
at. So, let me give you a framework to
understand what I'm talking about. I'll draw two axes here. One of them, we'll say, is competitive
versus collaborative. [BLANK_AUDIO] In other words, are people working
together with each other or against each other in trying to achieve the task and the other
one would be top down versus bottom up. Traditionally the way people are motivated
and encouraged to do things is top down. Someone says, this is what you will do. The alternative approach is to do it in a
more bottom up way by getting them to be motivated to
do it themselves. So, in this first quadrant here,
competitive top down, this would be grants so this is where a company or
foundation organization says we want to find someone who's going
to do a certain amount of research to achieve
something or get a certain result. And so we'll pick a winner and then give
them the money to do it. The alternative approach that's bottom up
was described in one of the earlier sessions, that's where we
would put the inducement prizes. Still competitive people, or
organizations, or groups are competing to win the prize but now it's bottom up. Anyone can submit to the prize and the
organization only pays out to the winner. Here, on the collaborative side, is what
I'm going to talk about more in this lecture. The traditional approach is to use
employees. So, if you want a group of people to work together to solve a problem, you tell them
to do it. The alternative, though, is what's called crowdsourcing, or in some cases,
microwork. This is a family of approaches that
encourage people to come together to either
collaborate with each other or to each take a small part or a
small amount of effort towards a task. But the people are not workers for the
entity that puts forth the task. They're are people who are motivated
through a bunch of different mechanisms that I'm about to talk about, voluntarily
to take on the task. So, what is it that might motivate people
to take on a task if it's not for their
employer? Well, one thing is, of course, money. So, there are a number of platforms. Amazon's Mechanical Turk, which I'm
showing you here, is the biggest and best known, which provides an environment for
this collaborative crowdsourced microwork. For people to voluntarily work on certain
tasks, typically for money. Doesn't have to be for money but typically these are situations where a company wants
something done. They want someone to go check out a bunch of websites or review a bunch of
documents. Do some sort of task that requires some
level of human intelligence. Amazon calls them here, human intelligence
tasks. You may not be able to see it on the
graphic here, it's a little small, but they're
task that can't easily be done by a computer, because if they
could easily be done by a computer we'd just have a
computer do them. The computers are a lot cheaper and faster than people, but lots of things require
some degree of thought and discrimination that
humans do well, so Mechanical Turk and other things
like it are platforms for people to come and do
those tasks, and typically they get paid a small amount for doing it, and this has
been quite successful, as you see here. There are over 200,000 of these tasks
available today on Mechanical Turk. So, this is one form of crowdsourcing. But, as I've talked about throughout the
class, money is not necessarily the only thing that
motivates people. So, is it possible to motivate people to
participate in these crowdsourced projects without necessarily
paying them to do it? Indeed, it is. And the way to do it is to use
gamification. Let me show you a few examples. This is something called Foldit. I didn't put the URL on here. But, it is just fold.it. Foldit. This is a site that was developed by some biomedical researchers at the
University of Washington. And they are working on 3D protein
folding. It turns out that the three dimensional
shape that a protein molecule folds up into has a tremendous impact on what it
does in the body. So, if we know the 3D shape, we are much
further along in developing drugs based on those
proteins and those other molecules. But it's incredibly computationally
difficult to figure out what shape a molecule will fold into. However, people are really good at
figuring this out because it's a puzzle. It's something that involves looking at
the shapes and figuring out the most efficient
configuration. And so, Foldit is a game like system that
gives you some real world proteins and asks you to figure out
the most efficient lay out. And by making this process game like, by making it seem like fun, these researchers
were able to motivate thousands of people to come
together and work on these problems with some
tremendous success. So, there was a case in which there was a
molecule that's important for AIDS research, has to do
with the monkey virus that's similar to AIDS, where for 15 years researchers
have been trying to figure out the the 3D fold, folding shape of that
molecule and unfold it. Volunteers were able to figure it out in
just ten days. Incredible success, and they have had
another, a number of other examples like that where this aspect of making
something feel fun or puzzle like and also telling people it's part of
helping medical research has been very successful at motivating
participation which has gotten to great results. Now the funny thing is, a lot of the press
that came out after this, development was announced involving
the monkey virus talked about video gamers solving
the problem. Online gamers were the ones who had solved
the puzzle and, and cracked the medical research problem and I
thought that was kind of ironic. Because these people were gamers only in
the sense that Foldit was a game. It wasn't that Foldit deliberately
recruited only people who actively played certain kinds
of online games, they were gamers because
they were using a site that was gamified. Foldit is a, a very good example but there
are a number of other examples like this where applying
game-like structures can encourage voluntary participation in
crowdsourced activities. Here's another one from a company called Microtask in Finland where they partnered
with the Finish National Library which was
trying to digitize major historical works in
Finish. And they needed people to review and proofread the optical character
recognition. So, they created this thing called Digital
Koot, that is basically a game where you play these
creatures. I don't really know what these are. But and they're building a bridge across
the river. And the component pieces of the bridge are
words that have been interpreted by the optical
character recognition system. And you need to see if the words are
correct and you use this game to feed in your work to the process of checking the
digitization of the, finished works. And they were able, through this process,
to get a huge number of people to participate and to review 2.5 million specific examples in this
digitization process. Again, not by paying people, but by
encouraging them by making it fun. Now, Microtask also has a business that uses the same game like interfaces in
environments where they do pay people, the game then just encourages and increases the level of
motivation. And then they go out to paying clients who
want to do things like form processing, where you want to understand optical character recognition
of handwritten forms. And you're willing to pay an amount of
money to Microtask which then can pay a little
bit to each of the participants and the
company gets back much better results on the quality of
their forms. The gamification there becomes not the
only form of motivation but something that dramatically increases the level of motivation and gets more people to
participate. In some cases, crowdsourcing and microwork
can be done without people even fully understanding
that that's what they're doing. Lewis Von On is a researcher at Carnegie
Melon University who is one of the leaders in developing what he
calls games with a purpose. One of the ones that he originally
developed was this example here called the ESP game. Which is a cute little game that shows
people a picture, here we see a bunch of sheep. And says, what is this? Type in what this is. And the same thing is given to two
different people. So you type in here what you think it is,
and the system says, did you and the other person
type in the same word? Because if two people looking at an image
type in the same word, there's a pretty high likelihood
that that word corresponds to the image. conversely, if people type in different
things then, maybe, those are not right and that provides some more data
to the system. What's the point of this? Well, it's kind of fun for the players to
figure out if you're matching with other people, if you
get the right description of something. And in fact they got lots of people to
participate in it, and try and get a high score, and engage in it in the same way that I talked about for other examples of
gamification. The point of this though, for the company
setting it up, is improving image search. Very hard for a computer to look at this,
and know this is sheep. We've got lots of great research on visual
recognition and computer vision, but it's still not as good as a
person doing it. So, this is a way of improving the quality of image search and meta tagging images
for search engines. And, in fact, Google bought, the company
bought the technology that Von On had developed for this ESP game in order
to improve their image search. Now here again, this is not something like
the prior examples where people were being told,
you're participating in image search. People were just being told here is
something fun and they're doing it to the extent that
it's fun. So, gamification can be used both in
situations where people know explicitly know what they're
doing or in situations were they are just being encouraged to
participate in some way in what turns out to be a crowdsourced
activity. So, what kinds of situations lend
themselves well? Well, they need to be tasks that can be
split up easily, fairly obvious, it needs to be a task that
lots of people can work on in parallel, either that means
each person gets a little segment of the task or many persons are
simultaneously trying to solve the task. And it also needs to be a task, as I talked about before, that people are
good at doing. Because, if either it's too hard for
people to do or, it's too easy for computers to do, those, the
people are not the best possible solution. The second major element is, it has to be something where, a gamified system is a
good motivational technique. There are three basic ways people can be
motivated to do something crowdsourced. One is for money. One is for love, it's something that they
care about, that's important to them. The Finnish library example might be a
good example, if people in that country want to promote the
preservation of Finnish literature. Another example was when Jim Gray, who was
a famous computer science researcher, disappeared
on his boat in the ocean. People volunteered to scour satellite maps
to try and figure out if they could find evidence of
his ship because they cared a lot about trying to
save this guy who was a very revered figure in the
field. So, they did it, not for money or because
the task was fun but because they cared about the
result, so that's another situation. And the third is people being motivated
for fun. And, and this one is really the one that we're most concerned about in
gamification. But, as I talked about with, the, earlier
examples. More than one of these can be present at the same time, and fun, game-like
approaches tend to be something that can magnify the level of
engagement, even if it's already there and being reinforced by
some other mechanism. So, inducement prizes, virtual economies,
crowdsourcing are three different techniques for expanding the
scope of gamification, going beyond dealing with a specific objective within a
company or for a company vis a vis its customer base. And, as I've talked about, they can relate
to each other in different ways. But they all rely upon the same basic
motivational techniques and lessons that we've been seeing
throughout this entire course.