# 8.1 Taking Stock

I've thrown a lot at you in the course so
far. And truth be told, if this were say, an
enterprise workshop on gamification, I would've
stopped after the last section. You've got all the basic concepts, you've
got a design framework. You've got all of the components necessary
to apply gamification successfully. But because this is a course, I want to go
deeper. I want to push you to think about some of the conceptual issues around
gamification and some of the big, deep questions about its future and about different ways to
implement it. And so this is a good point in the course
to take stock at a high level about just what
gamification is, because it turns out that for many of the
reasons that I've talked about, there are really two
different kinds of gamification. Two different things that people mean when
they use that word. Both to my mind are true examples of
gamification and there certainly are plenty of places which, where they
overlap, some of which I'll illustrate. But they're very different answers that
you get to about gamification, depending on which of these
two models you adhere to. And people use the same word gamification
for both of them, and don't necessarily think about
which one they are following. The best way I can think of to divide these two camps is to ask you the
following question. Is this a game? This slot machine here which I've showed
you before, is it a game? Well, if you use the definitions of games
that I gave you early on in the course,
probably not. There's no sense of a game-like or
play-like attitude. There is no sense of meaningful choices
here. The slot machine is just a big random
number generator. You pull the handle, that's it, and it
either gives you money or it doesn't. And, whether it gives you money or not, is
not based on your skill and your play. It's just based on a random determination
by the slot machine itself. So fundamentally, the slot machine is no
different than just flipping a coin, time after time after time, and seeing if
you get heads or tails. And that's not really a game, is it? On the other hand, many of the examples we
have of social games on social networks online, as well as gamification, as I've
talked about, look a lot like the slot machine. They create engagement loops which pull in
the user by the potential of a reward. They involve surprise. They involve trying to find a pattern. And many people find them powerfully
engaging. In many of the same ways that they find
games powerfully engaging. So, there's something game-like about the
slot machine, and we call it a game of chance. But, that's very different from most of
the types of games that I described early on in defining what
makes something truly game-like. And I think this is indicative of a broader split within the notion of
gamification. There really are two different things
going on when we use the term. One thing could be summarized as being
about doing. Gamefication is about doing things using
games and game-like structures. The other approach, I can over simplify by
saying it's about feeling. It's about, not necessarily what you do,
but how you feel about it, what's going on inside
you. And this leads to a variety of different
decisions that get made implicitly in which camp
you're in. So where do you draw inspiration from? If you're focusing on doing things or
getting other people to do things, then you will draw from
disciplines like marketing and economics, disciplines that are about
measuring behavior, and thinking about creating structures that encourage
people to behave in certain ways. On the other hand, if you come from the feelings camp, you're going to look more
to things like game design and cognitive psychology,
these disciplines that are about what's going on that makes someone
interested in something. What is there more deeply than the surface
phenomena that they're experiencing? And we've already talked about both of
these in the class, because the class is designed to give you both
perspectives and show where they overlap. Similarly, if you're thinking in the first
camp, you will talk about incentives, things that create some
mechanism to pull someone to an activity. The other camp, you'll talk about
experiences, what the person encounters, how they experience
certain activities. again, the incentive is something outside
of them, the experience is something inside
them. The next one is do we talk about
satisfying people's needs, people's desires, people's wants,
or do we talk about fun? That term that as we talked about we can
give meaning to and we can think systematically
about how to design for fun, but it's something more than just
meeting basic needs or even meeting higher level kinds of
needs that people have. There's something, again, experiential and
indivisible let this notion of fun. If you are in the first camp, you will
gravitate more towards game elements, which I've
talked about in great detail. And I say here inductive, in other words,
the idea is building up from the bottom, little bits and pieces of games to move
towards the more integrated experience. If you take the other approach, you will start with game thinking, which is more
deductive, starting with general principles about how games
work and using those to go down to the more specific
examples. If you are in the first camp, you will
think more about status. If you're in the second camp you'll think
more about meaning. And I've talked about both of these in the psychological section, the appeal of
status, and also its dangers. The first camp is P-B-Ls, points badgers
leaderboards, the second camp is gamification as
puzzles, as learning, as challenges which can be
represented in systems involving game elements and points
badges and leaderboards. But typically involve a different kind of approach, an approach that puts the
challenges and the puzzles and the creativity at the center rather than the structural or
visible elements. Rewards on the one hand, I've talked in
great detail about reward design especially in the
behaviorist tradition of psychology. Progression on the other hand. Mastery. Competence. Not necessarily about a reward, more about
the journey. And finally and in summary, the first camp
is about making users do things the second camp is about
making players awesome. Making users do things should mean making
them do things that they want to do on their own, but somehow
don't get to. There are things that are beneficial for
the player but the player needs some motivational help to
push them along that path. It doesn't mean necessarily forcing
someone or tricking someone into doing something that they never really wanted to
do in the first place. Making players awesome is about figuring
out in the first instance what it is that will help someone achieve
their full potential, and focusing more on that, focusing more
on the user's goals than the external goals of some organization or
company, viz-a-vis those users. Now it should be evident by now that I
tend to feel much more comfortable with this camp
here on the right, with the more game-based approach to
gamification, but I think it's important and essential really, to also
understand the one on the left. Many game designers tend to be very
dismissive or critical of gameification. And we're going to look in detail at some
of those critiques later on in the course. And I tend to think that while their
critiques do have some bite, the notion that
gameifcation is fundamentally flawed and that looking for example at game
elements as opposed to the more integrative structures of game
thinking is fundamentally misguided. I tend to take issue with that because, as
we've seen, there are lots of great examples of
using the more doing-based approach to gamification
to get to valuable results for companies and for users or players of
the gamified system. So, both perspectives tend to be valuable. And in a specific case you may find one or
the other is more helpful. But it's important to, as a starting
point, be aware of these two approaches and be aware of where they come
together and where they diverge.