# 1.3 Definition of Gamification

What is gamification? I thought you'd ever
ask. This is all very new, so there is not one universally accepted definition. But
let me offer you the following, which has the major components that we see,
generally, when people talk about the concept. Gamification is the use of game
elements and game design techniques in non-game contexts. There are three parts
to that definition. The first is game elements. I'll talk about this in much
more detail, what exactly that means in a later session. The second is game design
techniques. And the third is non-game context. So let me give you an example or
two and then I'll explain about each of these in a little bit more detail. So, the
first example is Nike Plus. Nike of course, make shoes. They make running
shoes and therefore, Nike wants people to run more. And so what they do with Nike
Plus was they developed a device, uses a piece of equipment called an
Accelerometer, that fits into the sole of your shoe. And it tracks every single step
you take when you're running. And so therefore, the device knows how far and
how fast you're running and it communicates wirelessly with a Smartphone
or your PC, which can aggregate together all of that data. And then what Nike did
was build a set of applications around it, that made the experience of running more
game-like. So, the Nike Plus Application has some functions like for example,
telling how far you've run, the fastest run you've ever had, the longest run
you've ever had, various kinds of tracking data. You can also compare yourself to
previous times and so forth to track what you're doing. But then interestingly, you
can also establish goals and challenges. And if you are successful in achieving
those goals, you get a trophy or a medal. Now that sure seems a lot like a game. And
Nike has built all sorts of other features into this system including the ability to
compete against friends, or the ability to get encouragement from friends. And
overall what this does is takes the experience of running and makes it feel
somehow more like the experience of engaging in some kind of game. Now you're
still going out and running. This is not saying, go sit down in front of your
computer and play a running game and see how fast the avatar, the character in the
computer can run. No, you're actually going out and running but the game
structures around it help to encourage you and to make that whole experience of
running feel somehow richer and more rewarding. Second example, also for the
purpose of getting people to run but it looks very different. So this is something
called Zombies Run. And the theme here is that you're being chased by an army of
blood thirsty zombies. Pretty common kind of motif, hopefully not something that any
of you have experienced, but a common setup for games. Only here the goal is not
to get you to sit indoors on your smart phone and play the game. The goal is to
get you to take that phone with you and go out and run. And as your are running, the
Zombies Run game is telling you that actually the reason you're running is that
you are running from the army of zombies that wants to kill you and eat your
brains. And as you go you'll, you'll hear from the game the zombies are getting
closer and you can see on a map where they are. You can get to power packs that will
help you get special powers, or go faster. Your friends can get in the mix as well.
The game that you are playing it's a very lightweight game, but it's taking the
experience of running and now subtly making it feel like more fun. Subtlly
adding another dimension to that experience of running. Different kind of
added dimension to what we saw in Nike Plus this is a much more immersive. Kind
of game-like experience as opposed to the challenges and rewards and so forth that
Nike Plus had, but both are examples of using game elements and game design
techniques to serve a purpose which itself is outside of the game. So, those are good
examples of what we're talking about here. So now le t's go back to the definition
and unpack in some more detail what these three aspects are, game elements, game
design techniques, non-game context. First of all, game elements. You can think of
game elements as the toolbox if you will. The pieces that you have to work with. If
you are trying to build some kind of service that uses the bits and pieces of
games. Not the game themselves, but the regular design patterns that make up the
games. So, let me give you the example. This is Empire and Allies. It's a casual
social game on Facebook made by Zynga. And clearly this is a game. We can see the
kind of graphical interface that we typically see in a game and the various
kinds of, pieces that give a game-like experience. You don't need to know how to
play the game, you can just can look at it and see that's a game. But, if we look
below the surface, we can start to break down, what are some of the elements of
that game. So for example, the game has, points. A way of keeping score as you are
accumulating something in the game. That's a very common thing that's in games. We
sorta take it for granted that lots of games, especially online or computer games
have points. But that's the whole point, if you, well, it's a regular pattern that
occurs in many of these games. Similarly, you can level up you can collect resources
here I believe these are barrels of oil that you've accumulated that you use to
build other more complex things in the game. The game can send you on quests to
find missions where the game says, go defeat this enemy, and you'll get certain
kinds of rewards. Avatars, showing your character. The social graph showing you
your friends, who you can play with or challenge and so forth. These are all,
bits and pieces that go to make up this experience that is Empires and Allies.
They're not the whole experience. There's a lot more to the game than this. But they
are parts of the game that we can pull out and then think about reusing. And the
point here with gamification is that we can do this with games. We can look at
what are the elements at different levels of the game, but we can also do the same
thing for services that are not games. So here's an example, this is called KEAS.
It's a service that, helps people in companies, engage in activities to make
them healthier. Whether that's exercise or eating well, and so forth. The company was
started by a guy named Adam Bosworth who, was at Microsoft and BDA Systems and later
ran Google Health. And, he has, the way it works is that you form groups within your
company and you get a series of challenges and you report on your activities, things
like exercising and so forth. And what we see here is exactly the same kinds of
elements that we saw in Empires and Allies. So, we see again the points and we
see again the levels. And if you look at this interface for points and levels in
KEAS, it looks very similar to the one that we saw in Empires and Allies. I mean,
graphically it's almost the identical thing on the screen and that's not by
accident. Here KEAS is using a familiar structure that some of their players or
participants may have seen and not only adopting those conceptual elements, but
adopting some of the aesthetics of them as well. Similarly here are the quests that
you go on, here's the social graph, seeing what your friends do, here are the
avatars. The, the visual graphical representation of each participant here we
also see rewards. If you do certain things in the game, you get more points, or you
get other benefits. And down here you can't really see it on the screen but you
see the label for it, badges. These devices that demarcate or represent a
certain achievement in the game. So, there are exactly the same game elements in the
KEAS service as in Empires and Allies but you can see there is a great deal over lap
and a notion of elements. The notion that there are these regular design patterns is
something that's common across games as well as gamified services. So, that's what
I mean when we're talking about game elements. The second thing here to talk
about in gamification is game design techniques. And the reason we need to talk
about that is that games are not just the elements. As I already said, there's
partly the visual experience of the game. But more than that, games are not just a
jumble of elements that have been stuck together in some haphazard way. Games are
things that are designed systematically, thoughtfully, artistically for the purpose
of being fun. And, so the things game designers do is not just a matter of pure
engineering. There's a lot of engineering involved. There's a lot of algorithms, a
lot of technology involved but there's also an artistic experiential side of game
design that involves thinking about problems in a certain way. And that
involves taking an approach that uses concepts that are common to all forms of
design as well as some concepts that are novel and specific to designing these
things called games. And here especially I'm talking about video games although
some of them relate to all games. That kind of practice is something that like
the game elements can be applied outside of games. And some examples of
gamification are more focused on the elements and some of them are more focused
on the game design modality. And some have elements of both, that's why both are part
of the definition. The other thing to understand about, game design techniques,
is that it involves a way of thinking. It's not just a set of practices, but it's
a way to approach the challenges that you have. And so, later on the course, I will
talk in much more detail, but just what that mean to think like game designer. The
third piece here is non-game context. And here we mean anything other than the game
for its own sake. So, when you're playing a game, you're playing to have fun in the
game. But if you are playing say, for reasons that relate to your business.
You're playing because you are serving some objective of your company or you're
playing because you're trying to learn something that's relevant to your work. Or
you're playing to get a job. Then that's a non-game context. What you're doing may
still be game like but the purpose, the rationale for the experience is something
outside of the game. It's some purpose that has a validity and a intention
independently of the experience of the game. And that doesn't just have to be
business although, most of the examples we use will start with that context. It could
be something like running. Now running is important to Nike for the purpose of
selling shoes but running is important to people who are doing it for the purpose of
being healthy and for the purpose of having all of the benefits that people
feel like they get from running. So, non game context is anything, where your
objective is outside of the game. So, circumstances were something involves some
combination of game elements and game design that is for a purpose other than
playing the game, that's gamification.