# 2.1 Gamification in Context

I am going to say a great deal about what
gamification is. But, first I want to say a little about
what gamification is not. There is a tremendous amount of confusion
about just what gamification means, how it relates to
different other game related concepts and so it's important to
clear that up and put gamification in context before
we move forward. First point, gamification is not turning
everything into a game. I hear this a lot, oh, so you're saying
we're all going to be playing World of Warcraft
at work. Or, we'll all be in some virtual
environment like Second Life on the job. No, in fact, gamification, in many ways,
is the opposite. Gamification says you're still in the real
world, you're still at your normal job, you're still on a website because you
want to buy a product. Gamification says, let's make that
experience better, learn from games. Find elements from games, that can enhance
the experience that you're having. Find the meaningful core of those
experiences and make them more rewarding, create greater motivation, but
not pull you out of the real world. Similarly, there are many situations
involving games and work, that aren't gamification. So, you know what the most successful
video game of all time is? It's Windows Solitaire, as you see there
on the screen. 9 billion hours that people played this
game in 2003. That was the latest data that we have, and
that was a long time ago. Where do you think they play it? Much of the time people play it at work. It's something people do when work is
boring. Gameification is about finding things that
are not boring in work, and using game elements to
enhance them. So, it's very different than just saying
there's games at work, that's gamefiication or we're going to
make work more game like. It's also different from using games in a
business context. So I mentioned earlier the Cracker Jack
toy surprise, as a game like approach to selling a
product. Wel and good, not gamifacation. Similarly, the McDonald's monopoly game is
a very successful promotion for them for
many years and it involves playing a scratch off game when you're at the MacDonald's
stores. Again, not about changing the experience
of a McDonald's, not about learning things from gamesm and
taking pieces from games. And putting them into the business process
itself. It's about using a game to make people
feel like they're more willing to come into the store because
they're going to get some kind of reward. So it's a cousin to gamification. But it's about using actual games, as
opposed to breaking games down, thinking about what games can teach
us in those contexts. Another example of using entire games, which I've already mention, is serious
games. Serious games, as I've said, can be
extremely powerful, for simulation, for systems thinking, for
education, but again, they are games. They are purpose built to create an
immersive experience that puts a person into an
environment. And that's different from thinking about
what can be taken from games and put into the existing environment to change it to make
it feel more engaging and to create better
motivation. Now gamification is also in some ways
broader than many people think. The previous examples were contacts where
gamification is more specific. Here, I'm going to talk about how gamification is bigger than people
sometimes talk about. Gamification is sometimes thought of as purely about marketing, purely about
getting people to buy things or getting people to
be more engaged with companies. Similarly, it's often thought about as
just point, badges and leaderboards or PBL's as I like to talk about them and
I'll explain in a later session. So here is Samsung nation which is an
offering on the Samsung website and you can see it's got various
badges and awards you can win, it's got points that people get, it's
got a leader board, it's got rewards, all standard gamification elements, this
is clearly an example of gamification. The point I want to make is not every
example of gamification looks like that. We already saw when I gave you three examples in the last segment, the
Microsoft language quality game and the speed ticket lottery in Sweden didn't really look like
this. So gamification is much broader than these
kinds of examples, although they do fit within
Gamification. The danger is thinking that there's
something magical about points and leaderboards and
rewards. And that thing is what Gamification is,
it's actually only a subset. Finally, Gamification should be
distinguished from Game theory. Now, Game theory has a deep relationship
to games and therefore to Gamification,. But it's something different. Game theory is a set of algorithms and
formulas and quantitative techniques for analyzing
strategic decision making. The Wikipedia entry that I put up here
says game theory is the study of strategic decision making, using
mathematical models. So game theory uses stylized concepts of games, people competing or agents
competing against each other but they aren't typically real world
games like Call of Duty or Angry Birds. Or checkers or football which have that element of fun and enjoyment and
engagement to them so certainly there are things that
can be learned from game theory that are relevant for gamification for
example one of the most famous game theory examples is the prisoners dilemma a
scenario where two prisoners would be better off. Both of them if they cooperated but the
way the rules are set up the incentives are for them not to
cooperate those kinds of models can be useful in thinking about gamified
systems but game theory is more about defining formal models and
mathematical structures to analyze those kinds of
behaviors. Which is different from what we're going
to be doing in this course. Alright so I've told you all the thing
gamefication is not what is it then? I gave you the definition use of game elements and game design techniques in non
game context. Here are three other things that
gameifcation does, the first is gamefication is about
listening to games. In other words, gamification means the
recognition that games are powerful. That games can teach us things, that games
are designed in sophisticated ways. That if we understand what those
mechanisms are, and we understand how to apply those same
techniques. We can achieve powerful business results. Secondly, Gamification is about learning,
learning from game design but also learning from fields like psychology and
management and marketing and economics. It's a way in to understand things about
motivation. About human behaviour whether that's in a
workplace context, a marketing context, a crowd sourcing
context or behaviour change context. Learning deep things about what makes
people act in a certain way. And design patterns to activate those
aspects of human behavior, that's what
gamification can do. And finally, gamification fundamentally is
about fun. Fun, that difficult to define concept,
which I will talk about in a later segment. Gamification recognizes that fun is
powerful, that one of the things that makes games. So important and so significant throughout
all of human history is that they're more than just
mathematical models. Yes, a mathematical model can be used to
play the game effectively. But the game is somehow more than that in
large part because the game creates this sense
that we call fun. Let me give you one additional framework
for understanding gamification in context. This comes from some articles by a group of authors led by Sebastian Deterding, an
influential gamification analyst based in Germany and
here's the url to one of these articles right here. See if you want to find out more. They use a 2 by 2 matrix to explain
gamification and to position it vis a vis other related
concepts. On one axis is the difference between
whole games or whole artifacts and partial ones. Or parts on the other axis they
distinguish play from games and this is a distinction that
I'll explain in more detail in a later segment but for now
think about games as things involving rules and
structures and winning and loosing. Whereas play is pure exuberant fun, pure release of exuberant energy in that kind
of context. So what they do in this article is they distinguish along those axes four
different quadrants. So the quadrant here involving. Play in whole artifacts they say well
that's toys when you play with something and it's a
thing that's called a toy and if you play but were not making it an entire
thing they say well that's called playful design it's about designing. Using the notion of play making things
feel a little bit more playful a little bit more fun but not systematically
structuring them with rules and goals and so forth. On the top left quadrant is something is a game and it's a whole artifact well
that's. Games, but specifically, for our purposes,
that's where we would put serious games. Because again, serious games are full
blown games to address non game uses. And that distinguishes them from
gamification. Which of course, goes here, in the top
right quadrant. Gamification being using parts of games to address non-business excuse me,
non-game challenges. It fits in this quadrant, right here. And if you can't read my scribbling,
here's the original chart from the article that they provide, which
shows these four quadrants. And so, this should give you a sense of
how Gamification fits in with some other concepts that are
related but variable to distinguish.