# 6.5 Self Determination Theory

Starting in the 1970s, Ed Deci and Richard
Ryan, two psychologists at the University of Rochester, developed the basis for what's now called,
Self-determination Theory. A comprehensive theory of human
motivation. Which through many studies has been able
to show, that people are not necessarily always
motivated by rewards. And in fact, intrinsic motivation, is a
more powerful and more effective way. To encourage people to act in certain
ways. Under self-determination theory, there's
actually a spectrum of motivational types. So, if we could draw three categories
here. At this end of the spectrum, is what they
all Amotivation. And what that means is, you have no
motivation one way or the other. You are totally indifferent to the
activity. That's called being amotivated. At the other end of the spectrum, is
Intrinsic motivation. Here, you do the thing for no reason other
than, that you love it. You do the thing. Because it is rewarding in and of itself. That's the strongest form of motivation,
because it takes nothing external at all, to get you to do the
activity. So, this is what we find, in a really
great game. You're not doing it for money, you're not
doing it for fame, you're not doing it for
status. You're doing it because it's fun. In the middle, there is the broad
category. Of Extrinsic motivators. And, what self-determination theory says,
is that there's actually a spectrum from the most external, to the most
internal forms of extrinsic motivation. So, all the way over here, closest to amotivation, the most external, they call
external regulation. [SOUND] And I know my handwriting leaves
something to be desired here, but the idea here is, at this point, you really don't
want to do something, or maybe you are indifferent
to it. The only thing that makes you do it, is
someone tells you to, someone else says do this,
and you do it, simply because you feel like you
have to you, have no perceived locus of control,
as psychologist talk about. There's no you in wanting to do this thing, it's just doing it for some
external cause. That, that doesn't mean it's bad, or it
doesn't mean that motivation never works, but it
does mean there is no sense of doing it because you personally value it, which makes that
motivation less powerful. The second category they talk about, they
call interjection. And the idea here is sometimes, we take external motivators, and make them
our own. So, this is typically where we would find
status, which, as we talked about, is an important kind
of motivator. In behaviorist operant conditioning type
approaches to gamification. Status says, I may not really want to do
this, but other people will value me. They'll think I'm cool, they will like me. So, I'm going to do it for that reason. So, it's something about me. It's not saying I'm doing it purely for
those other people, but it's saying. I am introjecting. I'm taking their view about status, and
somehow appropriating it to make me want to do the
thing. Next in line, they call identification,
and the idea here is, at this point, I've taken
the. External motivator, and I've somehow made
it my own. It's not just because other people will
think I'm cool, It's because I can see some value in
it. I don't really enjoy learning math, but I
can see that knowing something about math, is important to success in modern
business, and the modern economy. So I'll do it. It somehow is aligned with my own personal
goals. I identify. I can somehow logically say, there's value
to me in doing this, but I still don't really
want to. And then finally, the closest to intrinsic
motivation they call, integration. [SOUND] And here, there's a complete
alignment internally, between my goals and the
thing. This is, for example, the way many people
feel about exercise. I really want to exercise. It's good for me, I know I should do it. I can say, yeah, I want to exercise, and
yet I don't like exercising. It's just not fun for me. I still need some push. I still won't do it just because of love
of the thing itself. And then finally, when we get all the way
to this end, an intrinsic, the activity has reached that stage where it's worthwhile and motivating, in and of
itself. Now, take away here for gamification. All of these may be relevant in a gamified
system. The ideal is something that people just
love doing for its own sake. But that's not necessarily realistic in
every context. So the question is, how to utilize these
different kinds of motivation. Appropriately for the situation. And how to push generally, towards
approaches, that are more dependent on intrinsic
motivation. The more that this is something the person
really wants to do for themselves. And it has to be authentic. It's not that you've tricked them into
thinking they love do so, doing something, it's that they
actually love doing it. And find some meaning in it. They find the fun, in the activity, going
back to Mary Poppins, the more you can get towards that
direction of the spectrum, the better. So, okay, so, what does it actually take to make something
intrinsically motivating? And this is at the heart of
self-determination theory. Under self-determination theory, there are
three characteristics. Of intrinsic motivation. Three factors, that when they are present,
suggest that an activity will be worthwhile to people, in
and of itself. And this has been tested in study after
study, domain after domain, including with regard
to video games. So the three characteristics are the
following. The first one is competence. Which has to do with the person's sense of
ability. Their sense that they are accomplishing something, solving problems,
surmounting obstacles. They are achieving something within the
activity. The second one is autonomy, which says the
person feels like they're in control. I'm the one making the choices, it's not
someone else telling me to do this. It's me doing it by my own free choice. Meaningful choices. And the third one is relatedness, and by
this Deci and Ryan, means something like. Your activity is connected to something
beyond yourself. That could be some sense of meaning or
purpose. It could be, I am doing this because I'm using less energy, and that's good for the
planet. It could be, I'm doing this because it
will help my company, and I believe in my company, and want to be a
good team player in the organization. Or it could, be I'm doing this with
friends. Social interaction is an element of
relatedness, which we see a great deal, with regard to games. So, lets look at one example quickly, from
a gamified side, and how some of the standard kinds of game
elements we've talked about. Can activate, these three motivators, of intrinsic motivation under
self-determination theory. And the point here is that game elements
are not necessarily one or the other. It's not that a badge is inherently an external motivator, or inherently an
internal motivator. It can be one or the other, depending on the context, and the way that it's
applied. So, these examples are about a site called
Fitrocaracy, a site to encourage people to exercise, to work out
and to get into shape. And Fitrocracy uses all of the standard kinds of PBL type game elements we've
seen. But they do it in a fairly coherent
sophisticated way, which is really targeted towards intrinsically
motivating people, to engage in the activity. So, first here, this is what happens on
Fitocracy when you level up. You get a certain number of points. Standard game element. It says you are a level up, now you're now
at level three, and here is the badge that you get
for leveling up. But notice how this is all integrated
together, it's not just you've leveled up. It's, congratulations! You've earned it! earning, i.e. A sense of competence that you've done
something hard, that got you to that next level. You're now level three. Awesome! And the click button says I'm awesome! And you can share it with your friends. To tell them how awesome you are. And this is part of the overall structure
of this site. It really wants to make you feel good
about yourself, when you exercise, and it wants you to see this
as a challenge. And a challenge that when you overcome
some of those challenges, when you start to tag and, and report your workouts, and
start to move up, and how. Effective your workouts are, that means
you are leveling up, not just in some abstract sense, but you
are getting better. You're getting into better shape. So, that's all about competence, and
again, it's in how the site is designed, to make the person feel, that
their activity is achieving something. Mastering something, as opposed to just
doing something, for no particular reason. Second one is autonomy. And here typically in games and
gamification, the issue is choices. How much freedom does the user have? The games that are heavily structured and
scaffolded, where you have two choices but the game will push you to
just one choice. And there's very little freedom within
those choices, tend to activate less autonomy, than the more sandbox type
game environments, where the user has lots of scope for choice, and within
gamification, when services give users lots of options, choose your own
adventure, decide where you go. That tends, tends to activate more
autonomy. So, here we see on Fitocracy. You get to choose your interests. And you get to custom build what sets of
challenges that you have, based on the kinds of workouts you
want to engage in. And some of them are groups, some of them
are individual. The point is, your decisions about which
path you want to take, customize the site. So you feel like the experience is one
that you are in control of. It's not telling you. Cardio is what matters, you get to choose
that. And then, once you make those choices, it gives you a whole set of different
potential quests. So, it's not just that you need to engage
in one type of workout. Here's a whole bunch of different
workouts, this one's only worth ten points, this one's
worth 300. But obviously, the first one's a lot
easier. So, you get to make choices, and trade off
what's more important to you. Autonomy. The decisions are in the control of the player, not predetermined across the board
by the game. Finally, relatedness, here in Fitocarcy we
see a very strong social element. It's better with friends. Recruit your friends. Help keep each other motivated. Here's a pop-up that you see some other
people on the site. And it'll recommend people you follow. Here's groups, you can join together with
groups that are interested in particular kinds of workouts, who have
particular kinds of questions. The whole experience is structured very
much around, you're not in this alone. This is not just about you, sitting in a gym, or in your basement, and lifting
weights. This is about some activity, that you
engage in with a community, it's bigger than you,
that's relatedness. So, three good examples of applying self-determination theory, to make a
gamified site, even when using the standard PBL elements, feel more intrinsically
motivating. If you're interested in more on self-determination theory, two good books
to recommend. One is a book called Drive by Daniel Pink,
and this is a kind of business popularization
of self-determination theory. He recounts the history of the work by
Deci and Ryan. And then shows how this kind of approach
can be applied in business, and gives some great examples of companies, that are using these kinds intrinsic motivators for
great success. Really well written book, if you want to. Understand how this, these concepts apply
in business. It's not about gamification per se, but
it's very relevant to the discussions that we have
in this course. The second one is by Richard Ryan, and a
co-author, Scott Rigby and it is specifically applying
self-dermination theory to video games. It's called, Glued to Games. And it shows some of their research on,
specifically, how video games can activate these three
motivators of self-determination theory. So, ideally, every gamification
implementation, should be based on some attempt to engage these aspects of intrinsic motivation, which
self-determination theory outlines