# 2.6 Ethan Mollick Interview with Prof. Werbach

I'm here with my colleague Ethan Mollick
from the management department at Whorton. Who's done some really interesting work
looking at games in business. So first Ethan just you know, tell us a
little bit about how you got interested in this
set of topics. So, first of all. Like I think a lot of people are
interested in games. I started off, gamification, I started off
being interested in games. So I played games for a long time.
And that brought me into sort the early days of what was then
called serious games or gamification. I did work helping do game design for, the
military, to teach cultural understanding. I got pulled into doing games for
education, to teach things like financial literacy with the
Doorways to Dreams Foundation. And that led me to doing more serious work
on this, including writing a book on games and business, and
studying gamification much more seriously. So your book Changing the Game, came out in 2009, right, so it's several years ago
now. How do you think that the market has
changed, and do you think understanding of these kinds
of questions has changed? >> So, first of all, we were just too
early for the invention of the word
gamification, which I eternally regret. We called it, like, serious games or games
for innovation or games for work. so, I think there's been a massive take
off of this idea. I think that in some ways we're a little bit stuck
where we've been over and over again, in the world of
gamification. Which is not matter what name it's been
called, there's always been this difficulty breaking out of just
enough into the mainstream. Just figuring out how to get people to use
this. Sharing information with each other about
the best approaches And coming up with answers
that are supported by evidence that games
actually work and do what there suppose to do. So, while I'm really encouraged by the
number of ways people are using the gamification right now I still think we
have a ways to go in establishing best
practices. As part of what I'm excited about with
this class is that you have a leading role in doing
that. Well, we're trying, but, so, let me just,
let me just ask you to follow up a little on some of the things
that you said, I mean, I tend to think of serious games and gamification as being different, that,
that one is about these, kind of, full-blown game-like environments and one is about
the elements. Do you agree with that? Or do you have a, kind of, different take
on it? >> Yeah. I think that part of this is the eternally
shifting definitions here. So, gamification can mean something as
narrow as taking ideas from games and applying them to real
life. Or, it can mean using games for some sort
of non business, non entertaining purpose. So, I'm happy with that division, if you
want to call it that. And the warning I would sort of put out to
your students is that the vocabulary means
different things to different people. So, if you want to consider serious games
to be full blown simulations, that's fine by me. But I think the, the definitions aren't
commonly shared across every group. >> So, when you're, when you're talking
to people, you know, businesses, you know, military,
government, and stuff what do you find most effective to get
them to understand the potential of these game
like techniques. >> So I think once they understand the
scale of gaming that often helps right, so be it a number of hours
spent playing Angry Birds last year was somewhere north of eight or
eleven billion hours which is about thee equivalent of building
the Panama Canal everyday. Right. Once you start getting that workload, the
idea that non-games have to understand how big this is, that
can help. I also think understanding that there's a
linkage between gamification, and what we know about
psychology and sociology. These are not new topics.
Right. The idea of designing incentives to get
people to act properly is not new. So if you can link it to these ideas of
behavioral economics, of social psychology, I think
that's also a very helpful technique. >> Mm-hm. Okay. You mentioned the need for more best
practices and so forth. What do you think is mostly missing right now in gamification that could be
improved? >> So I think a few things.
I think first of all. Mistakes tend to get buried. We're in a situation where most people
creating games are only sharing the success stories. They tend to share these cases with vague
details. And it's very hard to build on only
successes, when we don't know about the failures that
are happening. And it's hard to build on only vague details, if someone's not sharing
information. So I hope we move past this sort of rah, rah, gamification is great, and
defensive community where we're trying to show everybody that this
is a great thing, to actually sharing both
successes and failures. Because I think that's how things advance. I think having common tool kits to work with, sensitive techniques
that we know are good or bad. Those things will all be helpful. And more basic research also.
>> Mm-hm. Okay, so you're a, a management scholar
what, what do you think that, that you or, or people like you can, can bring
to the table in this area? >> So, as I think I told you, the study
of games isn't even that that new. So there has been evidence, and scholars
writing about the importance of games at work since the 1920's. There is evidence that during the building
of the pyramids games were used as one of the motivating factors for
competing teams of workers. I mean these are not new phenomenon and as a result people have been thinking about
these things for a long time, and they've been thinking
of them in the context of what motivates
people to act. All these other factors that affect when
games work and when they don't. So, competition, compensation, gender,
social status. All these things come into play. So I think recognizing there's a long
tradition of looking at how people are motivated in the management world,
understanding how these many factors play against each
other. And how they can be used for good or for
bad purposes, can be very helpful. So what do you think is new, potentially? >> I think what's new about
gamification is that it separates out the work somebody does from the work
they think they're doing. So, oftentimes compensation is about, your job
is terrible. Let's pay you more to do it better. Or let's figure out a way to make it less
terrible. Or let's give you more control over the
aspects of your job. And I think these are all still areas
we're working on and figuring out how to do
better. What makes the gamification interesting is
you can be playing a game where you're labeling images online
but you think that you're playing some sort of you know
competitive game with other people where you're playing a
word guessing game. You could be diagnosing code within the
Department of Defenses computers and you think you're identifying
alien species on Mars. So the idea that you could actually make
that the work appear to be more interesting even without changing the underlying factors, I think is
exciting. I think the other thing that gamification
does is leverage the art of games. Right? So, we have some cold hard facts about
what motivates people and what doesn't, but games are much more
art than science. So, the idea your bringing together elements like graphics, like
leader boards, avatars, things that are beyond what are basic descriptions of gamification are in
the literature I think is really helpful too. >> What would you say are some of the
open research questions that we still need to
learn more about? >> So, I think there's a understanding
or at least the belief in the gamification
world. That games are generally good. People like them, and that's because a lot
of people who do, who do gamification like games.
Right? The fact is, most people don't like games,
or every kind of game; and even people who love games don't
like every kind of game. Right? So the idea of trying to understand when this is motivating, when this is
demotivating, when it's who you're turning off and who you're turning on by gameplay matters a
lot. I think also understanding which of these features matter in which kinds of ways
matter. And I think also in a more largely social point trying to understand
when this is moral to do and when it isn't. Right? So something coercive about having people
play games. Instead of giving them other forms of compensation that are even more direct,
right? Giving them virtual rewards instead of
real rewards. At it's best that's really great and
uplifting. At its worst it's exploitative. And you think about the idea of you know, distancing people from the
implications of their job. I find that a bit troubling.
And there's some interesting work going on with that as
well. >> Mm-hm. Absolutely. So. Any final words for our students out there
in the course? >> So I think we're in a very exciting
time right now and you're coming into gamification at
just the right moment. So the initial sort of everybody's excited
about this is still happening but is maybe dying down
slightly. And we're now in a stage where we have to
figure out how this works and there's almost
limitless potential to get this right. And there's a really interesting chance to
explore. And I'd urge you as you move forward in gamification to make sure you're sharing,
communicating, and viewing this as a community that's trying to get
results together, rather than an individual who's
trying to succeed. >> Great, Ethan. Thank you very much for joining us.
>> Thank you.