# 1.2 Course Overview

So what's this course about? It's important I think to start
with a set of learning goals, especially because gamification
is a novel concept. It's not something like
introductory physics where it's obvious what a course
is going to teach you about. So there are four things that I hope that
you will get out of this course, if you stick with it all the way through, watch
the video, do the homework, and so forth. The first is to understand
what gamification is. The second is to understand
how it might be valuable. The third is to learn how
to do it effectively, and the fourth is to understand some specific,
concrete applications of gamification. So, let me say a little
bit about each of those. What is gamification is not obvious. Gamification is a new concept, and,
in many ways, it's misunderstood. So, we'll talk a lot about understanding
just what gamification is, and what it isn't,
as well as some of the history and some of the context for
this emerging business practice. Then we'll talk about how gamification can
be used and why it might be effective. And notice I say here might be. Gamification is a powerful tool. And I'll give you lots of
examples of companies and other organizations that are successfully
applying game mechanics and applying other lessons from
games to address their problems. But it's important to have
some measure of skepticism, to realize that gamification
isn't right for every problem. It's not, by any means, a panacea. And furthermore,
doing gamification requires you to understand how to do it well and that's
why we have this third learning goal, to talk about how to do
gamification effectively. You can understand how gamification might
be relative to a problem but you need to understand the different techniques,
the different components that you can use, and the pros and cons of different
forms of gamification in order to know how to do the right sort of thing
when faced with a particular situation. And finally some applications, there will
be examples running throughout the course. Some of them in for
profit business context. Some of them in non-profit
social impact kinds of contexts. But we'll look towards
the end of the course at some specific domains like Inside
the Enterprise and For Social Good, where there are particular issues that
come up with applying gamification. It's important to note,
this is not a technical class. There are no technical prerequisites. There's not going to be
any coding involved. It's also not a full
blown game design course. So, there's no requirement that you be
familiar with any of the technical or aesthetic aspects, artistic aspects,
of being a game designer, we’re going to talk about some
of those concepts in the course. Because in order to do
gamification effectively, even just as a business person, you need
to understand something about game design. But there are no detailed
prerequisites involved anyone who has a basic kind of understanding
about online services, and about digital technology,
will be fine understanding this course. I mentioned all of the stuff behind me
on the bookcases, keep an eye on it. You might notice some changes. Some things that look different
from video to video and if you really notice what's going
on you might notice something else, from time to time, appearing back
there and who knows, maybe a message. Now, this course is novel in
a few different ways which I wanted to highlight here at the outset. The first, obviously, is this new
method of open online delivery. That's something that has been
used in certain experiments for the past few years but
has really expanded greatly only recently. So this is a new way for
me in teaching and probably for you a fairly new way
in learning this kind of material. But this course in particular has some
other aspects that distinguish it even from other courses that
use this mechanism. The first is that gamification
is a brand new concept. As I’ll talk about,
it has roots that go back many years. And it’s going to draw on some
very old concepts in psychology, and management, and so forth. But gamification as a phrase to describe what I’m going to talk about
is really only a couple of years old. And as I said, just understanding what
gamification is, is not universal today. So we're going to have to start by learning what the concept
is to begin with. The third thing that's new is
that this is a new course. I've taught on this subject in person
at the Wharton School at Penn. In fact, I think that I offered
the first class on gamification for business that had ever been offered
anywhere at any university. But for this massive open
online version on Coursera, I rebuilt the course entirely from
scratch, to take advantage of some of the unique aspects of this
new kind of online environment. And finally,
this course is about practical knowledge, which may be somewhat different from
some of the other courses that you take. On an open online platform that
focus on understanding concepts. This is not necessarily about theory. There's a lot of theory that we'll touch
on that goes in to concepts we discuss in the class, but this is a course, ultimately, that is designed to
give you some practical knowledge. That's designed to help you understand
how gamification is used today in the real world and how you potentially
can be someone who uses it yourself. Now as we go along I'll point
you through various lengths and other information if you want to dig
deeper into gamification concepts. But one resource in particular that many
students find helpful is my book For the Win, How Game Thinking Can
Revolutionize Your Business which I co-wrote with a colleague, Dan Hunter. It's not a required text. You don't have to purchase it
in order to take the course, but I hope that you will take a look and
consider it. Students often find that the book is
helpful because it's laid out in the same basic structure as the course, and expands
upon it with additional examples and frameworks that you can then take
with you after you finish up the. It's available in e-book form on
all the major e-book platforms and also in paperback. It's also now available,
in addition to English, in Spanish and Japanese translation with a number
of other translations in the works. If you go to the link at the bottom of
the page, the Wharton Digital Press link, it will give you a list of retailers
to purchase it in e-book or hard copy format in various
countries around the world. I hope you will at least
take look at the book and consider it as a useful resource to deepen
your understanding of gamification.