# 6.4 How Rewards Can Demotivate

The biggest danger of rewards in
gamification, is that the rewards will actually demotivate. In other words,
someone's already motivated to do something. And the reward makes them, less
likely to do it. How could that be? The basic reason is that rewards, acting as
extrinsic motivators can crowd out, the intrinsic motivation that was already
there. You start to focus so much on chasing the reward that you think the
reward is the reason to do the activity and you no longer have the intrinsic
motivation to do it that was there before. So the ultimate result is you are less
motivated than when you started. This is sometimes also called the over
justification effect and it's a danger in any kind of system that uses rewards,
including systems involving gamefication, this substitution effect that the
intrinsic motivation goes away and is replaced by the less effective and
problematic extrinsic motivation of the rewards. Now, this may sound
counter-intuitive, but it's been confirmed by study after study in a wide range of
areas. So here's some examples of some of the studies that have shown this
demotivating effect. The first one or set of studies involves creative activities
like drawing. And the experimenters would give a group of kids some paper and
pencils and crayons and say go draw. And some of the kids were more into drawing
than others, but some of the kids really loved drawing. They just sat and did it.
They drew great pictures and they did it because they loved doing it, intrinsic
motivation. Then the experimenter gave the kids rewards, said alright. We're going to
give you something for the drawing and there are a variety of different rewards
used. Maybe we'll give you an actual tangible prize for the best drawing, maybe
we'll just give you a gold star, good job. Maybe we'll just give you a verbal
compliment, well done, that's it. But in each case the idea was not just draw for
it's own sake, but draw for some reward. And then, after doing that for a while,
the experimenter took the reward away. Now, kid s we're back to where we started,
just go and draw for fun. What happened? Low and behold, the kids who had been
intrinsically motivated, they were going to draw just for the fun of it. Once the
reward was added and then taken away we're no longer as motivated to draw and the
drawings that came up with just weren't as good. Because they have substituted that
extrinsic motivation of the reward for their intrinsic desire to draw. So, this
has been replicated across many different kinds of creative or artistic kinds of
pursuits and you can think about this in examples of gamefication that involves
something creative. This is probably more likely to be in an internal or enterprise
case of gamefication than on some of the external marketing ones, but. It's a real
concern in those areas where the goal is to motivate people to innovate and be
creative, in business context and the reward, the gamified system may actually
push away from that. Second study came from Israel, and it has to do with of all
things, daycare pick-up. And in this case, the researchers looked at a daycare centre
where parents had to pick up their kids at a certain time after work. And some of the
parents were late. And the daycare center didn't like that, it wasn't fair to them,
they had to stick around more, and they thought, well, how do we motivate the
parents to come on time? And they thought, alright, we'll use a punishment. Again,
punishment is just a flip side of a reward. It should work the same way in the
opposite direction. We'll charge parents, I don't remember what the number was but
let's say $ten, anytime they are more than five minutes late picking up their kids.
And they thought this would incentivize the parents to come on time. What
happened? Parents came even later. Why? Well, we can think about it if we look at
what's going on in those parent's minds subconsciously before what was getting
them to pick up their kids on time. Social pressure, desire to not inconvenience the
workers at the daycare center and so forth. Now all o f a sudden this is an
economic exchange. It's worth $ten to pick up my kids late. If the thing I've got
going on at work, or whatever else is happening, seems like it's worth more to
me than $ten, I'll just pay the $ten and all of those intrinsic motivations caring
about the people at the daycare center, caring about their kids getting picked up
on time. Caring about other parents and so forth, go out the window, it gets replaced
by the extrinsic reward. And the effect, in that case, is people come even later.
Similarly studies of blood donation have found that when encouraging people to
donate blood, primarily based on civic duty, and helping other people, and
dealing with disasters and so forth. Is replaced by primarily paying people to
give blood, people are less likely to give blood, it crowds out that intrinsic
motivation. Final set of studies, and these are somewhat controversial, suggest
that teacher merit pay, paying teacher is based on the results of the kids in their
classes don't actually produce better results. For the same reason, they tend to
crowd out the intrinsic reasons for teaching well and turn it into purely a
calculus about how to get the desired results for the reward. So, all of these
kinds of studies suggests that there's a danger in rewards that will actually make
people less motivated to do the task, and thus produce worse results than intended.
A couple other aspects to these findings that are worth highlighting. The first is,
they, generally, these studies are generally limited to what are called
interesting tasks, i.e. Tasks that require some creativity, that people have some
reason to want to do. No task is inherently interesting. And no task is
inherently boring. So, I might not really want to stamp out things on an assembly
line all day long, but someone else might find that challenging, to get it right
every single time. That being said, there are certainly tasks that are more
interesting, generally speaking, for most people than others. Tasks that require
some creativity t hat require some thought or problem solving or some ability. Those
tend to be tasks that most people think of as interesting. And so the study's about
over-justification focus on tasks that start off with some level of intrinsic
motivation. Their tasks, that were interesting to begin with at least at some
level and reward seem to make them less interesting. Second thing here is that the
types of rewards do matter. So, I described a number of different categories
of rewards, and the over-justification effect, the demotivating effect, is more
true with some rewards than others. So for example, tangible rewards tend to be where
the largest demotivating effects happen. Because those are things that are purely
substituting something extrinsic. Something external to the activity for the
intrinsic motivation that's there. Tangible rewards are the ones that you
might think are the best possible rewards, right? We'll give you a bonus or some
thing of value in return for this activity. Those are the greatest risk of
substituting for the intrinsic motivation. Conversely, if the reward is unexpected,
if it's that surprise reward, hey guess what, we just decided to give you a bonus
for your good performance, that doesn't have as much of an effect on intrinsic
motivation because it didn't crowd out. When the person was doing the thing, they
were doing it for the intrinsic reason and they were surprised by the reward. So
random, or chance rewards that come about without expectation don't tend to have as
much of this kind of problem. And finally, the other one that's interesting to talk
about, performance contingent rewards. So remember, these are the rewards that are
based on achievement, actually doing something effectively in the task, can go
both ways. If the reward is simply saying, the whole point is the end point, the goal
as opposed to doing well, and the person tends to take away from that, that this is
really not about me and my accomplishment but this is about some external thing, the
performance leve l, then they're demotivating. On the other hand, if the
reward is seen as purely informational. It's say, "You did a good job." This is
recognizing the fact that you achieve something. Your performance was great.
It's all about your performance. The reward is just a marker. Of what you did.
Then, we don't see the same effect. Then, there's not the demotivation. And this
comes from a variety of papers by Ed Desi and Rich Ryan and they're co-authors that
who we're going to meet in more detail in the next segment on self determination
theory. This is one in which they did a meta-analysis of over a hundred different
papers on effects of rewards. And these were some of the effects that they found
on different categories of rewards. So, to dig into more of why this happens and to
cut it back to gamification, we need to focus on the underlying theory that
explains why certain kinds of intrinsic motivators work and explains what kinds of
things actually lead to intrinsic motivation.