# 3.1 Why Gamify

I've talked some now about what
gamification is and about what games are. It's time to get into the challenge of
thinking like a game designer. Understanding problems through the lens
of what I call game thinking, the core skill for gamification.
And I'd like to start doing that. By posing a fundamental question.
Why gamify? Why would you even think to take a site
or a business process and try to make it more game-like?
If you're interested in some serious results and achieving some real-world
serious objectives. So let's look at an example.
And try to think about why gamification made sense for this service.
The example is Dodgeball. Dodgeball was one of the first successful
smartphone applications. It was developed by a group of graduates
from the Interdisciplinary Technology Program at NYU.
And these guys like to, hang around in bars.
So they built an app for people who like to hang around in bars.
Here you see a screen shot of the web client, and dodgeball gave you this map
that showed you, where you were, and then you could check in, and say here I am.
I'm at this location right here. This bar that's on this street, and then
you can see where your friends were, where other people were who were using
the application where they have checked in, and this got some notoriety, started
to get some pick up in New York and San Francisco ans places like that and in
fact Google bought the company. But, dodgeball had a problem.
The problem was that it's a chicken and egg situation.
If lots of your friends are on dodgeball and there's lots of check-ins that you
can find, then there's a great incentive for you to check-in as well.
You want to get access to all the information, you get a lot of value from
seeing all of your friends and you know they will get value from seeing what
you're doing. On the other hand If you go to Dodgeball,
and there's a blank map, not too much reason for you to bother checking in.
So how does the service get to critical mass?
Get above that level where there's a not, not enough activity to get people
involved? So that was one of the basic challenges
that Dodgeball had. After leaving Google, Dennis Crowley, one
of the fathers of Dodgeball, started a new company that had a fairly similar
basic structure. It involved going and checking in on a
mobile client at locations that you would go to.
But this time, his new company, Foursquare, implemented what we would now
call gamification. So think about why would Foursquare use
gamification? What are some of the aspects of this
service that we saw originally in dodge ball that might lend themselves to a
gamified approach? There's a number of different things that
you might come up with and there's clearly no right answer but lets think
about some of the aspects of this problem that might make gamification appropriate.
The first is that Dodgeball had what we could call an engagement gap.
It needed to get more people to engage with and use the service, and making the
service fun, making the service feel more engaging and gamelike, is certainly a
powerful way to do that. The second is that Dodgeball didn't have
a lot of variety in it. Basically it was check in, or don't check
in. And then, again, you could get some
analytics or information, as well as seeing where your friends where checking
in, but there weren't too many different things to do.
And when things are unitary like that. Where it's either do something, or don't
do something, It doesn't tend to engage people as much unless there's some very
direct result that they get. If it's go to this website, click a
button buy this product, then you can see the relationship.
but if it's not that clear, if there's some value in the exchange but it's not
as direct, having options having choices As we talked about in discussing games as
meaningful choices could potentially make the experience more popular.
Then next is that Dodgeball didn't really have any progression.
Check in or not, you really didn't get anywhere by virtue of what you did.
And so checking in the hundredth time was kind of like checking in the first time.
Again, limited the motivation of players to want to participate actively in that
system. The good news is that dodge ball was a
very social application, it involved relationships with your friends and
social interaction. Is very powerfully tied to games.
Because we love to compete against our friends, we love to collaborate and share
and team up with our friends. We love to have status vis-à-vis our
friends, and also see what our friends are doing.
And so all of that is potentially quite consistent, with the gamified approach.
And finally there was an opportunity with a service like Dodgeball to make the
action a habit. If you have to think each time, oh, I
better get out my phone and go and check in, you're not going to do it all that
much. If it's habitual, if it's just a natural
thing that you do. You just kind of automatically, when you
go to a new bar, or a club, or a restaurant, or even one that you've gone
to many times before, you just pull out your phone and check in.
Then you're much more likely to do it. So the challenge for Dodgeball, and for
its successor Foursquare, was how to make this action a habit.
Something, again, that is very well suited to games, which create this
environment that encourages people to come back and come back.
So there's, those are a few of the reasons that I think gamification seemed
to make sense for Foursquare, the successor service to Dodgeball.
So let's look at what Foursquare did. The most prominent that it did was
implemented a concept called Mayorships. So, if you check in the most times Out of
everyone who's checked in at that particular location da da da da you're
the mayor on Foursquare. And here you see the badge, badge is
another aspect of gamification [INAUDIBLE] I'll talk about.
This is the badge you get of being the mayor of 10 locations at one time, it's
actually the super mayor badge, but it's a representation of.
that achievement of becoming the mayor, and For Square built a system that made
it very easy to notify your friends on Twitter and Facebook that you'd become
the mayor of a place, who you displaced as the mayor.
It created this friendly competition which made the act of checking in
something more fun, and something that had more of a Reward to it, not
necessarily a monetary reward. Although some venues do give incentives
to people who are mayors. But a reward in that you see something
and other people see that you are on top when you become the mayor of a venue.
Simple but potentially valuable use of Gamification.
And then Foursquare built a whole other set of game mechanics around this check
in process. So this was a screenshot from the
Foursquare page of Dennis Crowley, the CEO of a Foursquare, and you see a
variety of data points about what he's done and then here on the right you see
the badges. Badges were an important element of what
Foursquare did... They allow them to create much more
richness of the service. Remember I said, choices are important
and progression is important. Badges gave all sorts of options.
Again, it's still just checking in, but now checking in becomes a much more
variegated, kind of, activity. It depends where you check in, if you
check in at a certain place, like a health club, you get a badge.
If you check in at a health club a certain number of times, you get another
badge. If you check in at say a conference, like
south by southwest, there's special purpose badges you get that you could
only get there. So suddenly this one act of checking in,
becomes something that seems very rich, and complex, and nuanced for the users.
It also is something that allows you to level up.
So Foursquare implemented different levels within their badges.
So checking into an airport gives you one badge.
but checking into 20 different airports say, gives you a higher level of that
badge, which is harder to get. And these are all examples of game
mechanics built around the basic process of checking in.
Did it work? Well Foursquare now has over 20 million
users. They've raised over 70 million dollars in
venture capital valuing the company over 600 million and they've successfully
overcome challenges from major companies like Facebook that got into this social
location marketplace. Now this Foursquare still has a long way
to go and correlation isn't causation. That doesn't necessarily tell us that the
game mechanics were the reason for their success.
This is something that we'll come back to later.
But it's worth thinking about how the gamification that Foursquare implemented
ties back to the challenges that they faced.
So consider how gamification addressed the engagement gap, the desire for habit
formation. The need for more choices and more
progression, and taking advantage of the social dimension of what Foursquare was
doing. That's the kind of thought process that
you need to engage in in approaching problems through the lens of game
design...