# 7.5 Fun and Tools

The final elements of my gamification
design frame work are don't forge the fun and deploy the
appropriate tools. Now, you might think that it should be
obvious that gamified systems are fun, but it turns out
that when people start to go down the path of
building a game of fight system, they often lose
sight of that objective. Especially if it's a system that is of the PBL variety, where you're focused more
on the kind of behaviorist loops of motivating
certain action and certain responses to stimuli feedback
that people get. It's easy to forget that the point here or
at least one of the key points here, is that this is
something game like. This is something that people get pulled
into because it feels somehow enjoyable. And what I found in teaching students
about gamification and asking them to come up with gamification examples, is that
very often they lose sight of that. Very often I have to say, well why would
someone want to do this? Is this really fun? Can you think about ways to make this concept that you've come up with more
engaging? More involving puzzles and problems and
surprise and delight and all of those things that we associate
with fun. So this is something that I would
encourage all of you to focus on as well, when you do your gamification
design project for this course. Keep in mind that fun is important. Now what's fun? Well we've talked about this a lot, and
it's certainly not the case that PBLs are not necessarily fun, that there's nothing
fun in badges or there is nothing fun in rewards. The challenge is making sure that those
things are deployed if you're going to use them, in a way that actually unleashes some of those different
characteristics or versions of fun that I talked about earlier on in the
course. So, for example, here is the Samsung
Nation site which I have used a few times before. And this introductory paragraph is where
they describe to you why this is something exciting, and it's exciting I guess
because they say it's an exciting social loyalty
program. You earn badges, move up in the ranks and have fun discovering everything
Samsung.com has to offer. Now, the question is whether that's really
something fun and I'm not saying this to make fun, if you will, [LAUGH] of
Samsung or anyone else. But to pose the question whether this
gamified site really focused in on what aspects of the process are
engaging for the user. Maybe they designed a system that was
effective in terms of designing rewards using some of the
techniques that I've described. And coming up with a platform for people
who happen to feel motivated from the opportunity to earn
badges and points and so forth. But if the activity underlying it isn't
something fun and engaging, then there is an ultimate challenge in
making the site effective. And making it effective for a broad group
of people, as opposed to that relatively self-selected group, who respond more
eagerly to these kinds of addictive elements of PBL type
systems. And again, I'm not privy to what the
designers of Samsung Nation were thinking, or what kind
of response they've gotten to this service, but I think it's
important to go beyond just assuming that the activity is fun in
and of itself. If Samsung.com's website were interesting
enough by itself, they might need some of these game
mechanics. And the point here though, is that fun can
be anywhere. So think about whether Samsung Nation's
site has that element of fun in it somewhere, and think about
some other sites. So for example fitocracy. I mentioned earlier. Is about using the same kinds of PBL
mechanics to get people to exercise. And this is a site that really seems to have a strong commitment to making
things fun. If you just look at the site, woohoo, and
you look at all of the messages here. Here's how fitness can be fun. You look at the graphics which are kind of
fun. You look at the different kinds of messages, the, the way that they've
designed things. The little images, the graphics, the
discussion among people. It all seems to be built around this
notion reinforced time and time again, that working out is great,
it's exciting, it's awesome. And you are awesome for going down this
path of using a site like Fitocracy and finding groups of people to work with, and
leveling up and so forth. So, this is a site that at least seems committed to the notion that what they're
doing is fun. And again, there's no abstract reason why
exercise has to be fun or not. But it's important to at least go down
that path of thinking about where the fun is in the
activity. Remember this, the LinkedIn progress bar? Where's the fun in that? Well, there is some fun in getting
feedback, knowing how far you are and knowing that you're most of
the way there. There is some fun in knowing incrementally
that you only have a little bit more to get to the next
level. Is is, this is not a kind of deep
meaningful life changing fun. It's just a light weight bit of amusement
and engagement on top of a fairly mechanical process of
filling out your profile. For that activity, that may be enough fun
and in fact Linkedln saw real and substantial results
with that level of fun. So, fun is always important to think
about. But the kind of fun, and the magnitude of
the fun, always has to be considered in light of
what the application is. Here's one more. Lest you think that fun has to be about
something lightweight and goofy, this is Folded, which I'll discuss
more later on in the course. Folded is an application developed by some
scientist at the University of Washington, and they are
researchers on protein folding. The three-dimensional structure that
protein molecules fold into, determines the effect that those proteins have in the
body. So, we can know the chemical composition,
but if we don't know the 3D folding structure, we don't know
whether a protein will have desired effects for example in a a vaccine
or other drug, and it turns out that 3D protein folding is a
monstrously difficult problem. Even our most powerful super computers
take huge amounts of time to calculate all the different potential 3D shapes of
all the molecules in a protein. But guess what? 3D shapes of protein folding look like a
pattern that if it's designed in a good way with a good interface,
people like to play around with. And so these researchers figured out a way
to create a game, or a game like system where people get scores for
finding the best possible folding pattern for
certain proteins. And this system has been spectacularly
successful getting people voluntarily just for fun to go and play around with
these proteins, and they have come up with a number of significant break through
figuring out the 3D protein folding shape of molecules that are relevant in things
like finding vaccines for HIV/AIDS. So real advances in a very serious cause medicine, based around making this
process fun. It's not that you have to read a whole lot about organic chemistry and
microbiology and proteins. What you get is a game-like puzzle and
that ties in to the larger process. Recall that relatedness is an important
aspect of intrinsic motivation under self
determination theory. Helping find a cure for AIDS is about as
meaningful a thing as one could imagine. So this is a good example of leveraging fun in different ways for a very serious
challenge. The final step in the design process is to
deploy. And the key in deploying is to use the
right tools. I've given you a pretty extensive tool
kit, a range of different game elements there were 30 of them that I
listed in that unit in the course and we've also talked
about different kinds of fun, different kinds of game design techniques, different kinds of design
rules. The point there is to illustrate the
richness of the palate that a gamification designer
has to work with. And all the examples that I've been giving are trying to illustrate that while the
PBL style gamification examples are real and
can be successful and can have volatility if
they're designed right. There' s also a lot more possible beyond
that. So, the final step in gamifaction design. Once you've gone through the other steps,
and it's expressly last because you can't do the design until you've asked
all the right right questions. But once you've asked all those questions
and come up with at least provisional answers, you need to sit down
and think about all the different options and the different techniques and
tools that can be used and pick the ones that seem best and most
appropriate for the challenge at hand. And then iterate and play test and iterate
again, and keep improving the system to get something that
works for real people.