# 10.4 Behavior Change

What's the secret to sustainable
behavioral change? This is particularly important for
gamification for social good because so many of those contexts involve people
wanting to change the way they act in their lives, and
meeting some mechanism to motivate them to do it on a
reliable basis. But it's relevant to other forms of
gamification as well and of course relevant to much more
beyond gamification. There are lots of situations where we want
to change the way we act, somehow change our
standard default behavior. But it's hard to do so. Really what we're talking about here is
the formation of habits. So a habit is something that you do
automatically. You don't stop and think about it
consciously. It's just the default, it's the normal way
you do something. And that makes it something that you will
reliable do, in a way that even something you know objectively is good for
you, you're not as likely to do because it requires you to activate that conscious, structured part of your brain
as opposed to the automatic, unconscious part
of your brain which can just run on
autopilot. So ideally, what we want to do in a lot of
these context, is help people move from the conscious mode of thinking
to the automatic mode which is the domain of
habits. B.J. Fogg who is the director of the persuasive technology lab at Stanford, has
for many years studied behavior change and particularly
looked at how technology devices and online services can
promote behavior change. He's developed a framework for describing
how behavior change works, which is particularly useful for us in the
context of gamification. Fogg's model, which is here, has basically
three elements. You see here the formula B is behavior,
and he says it's equal to mat, M is your motivation, A is your ability and T
is your trigger at the same moment. If all three of those things are present
he says we are likely to see people take the
action. So, let's look at each of these three
elements. The first axis is motivation, and here
we're talking about they're some things that you really
want to do. And the more that you want to do them, the
more motivated you are, the more likely you're
going to do them. Ability says there are some things that
are easy for you to do. And, the easier it is, again, the more
likely you're going to do it. But, any action that we can think of, has
to get plotted here on this graph. So, maybe I really want to run a marathon. I'm really desperately motivated to do it. But, I'm not much of a runner. I couldn't run a marathon if I tried. I'd collapse long before the finish line. So that would go up here. And some other task that maybe is pretty
simple for me to do. Something like getting up in the morning
and jogging for 10 to 15 minutes, which would be great
everyday. I can do, it's pretty easy but I just don't because I'm not sufficiently
motivated to do that. And so what Fogg says is that we can plot
everything on those two axises. And then we can look at the third element,
which is what he calls triggers. And triggers are the things that push us at a particular moment to engage in the
activity. And what he says is basically, the more
that you are out here, in this domain of the graph, the upper right,
where both ability and motivation are high, the more likely it is that the
trigger is going to work. So, the,the triggers are based on where
you are. And, in designing these systems, it's
important to think about, first of all, what the level of motivation is, second of all,
what the level of perceived ability is. Important to specify, this is what the
person thinks their ability is, it's not necessarily something that'd we find
if we did an objective test, because again, this is about people's behavior and
it's based on what they think they can do not what they can actually do
that's the second dimension. And finally what could trigger given those
conditions the desired activity. The trigger according to Fogg gets
associated with the activity, echoing that behavior is notion
of operant conditioning. But Frogg's framework is broader and
brings in the notion of it as well. So, what are some of the things that we
can learn from this framework? The first one here is that motivation and
ability can trade off against each other to the extent that motivation is high,
then you can do something really hard. But to the extent the motivation is low,
it needs to be a pretty easy task for someone to be
willing to do it. And so in looking at gamification
techniques, which can push on both of these dimensions, it's worth thinking
about which area is worth the most effort and what the nature is of the
activity, and what's needed in order to move people to make
that sustainable behavior change. Second lesson from this is that timing
matters a lot when it comes to triggers. Because the trigger is the thing at that
moment that gets you to take the action based on your level
of motivation and ability, and so it's important to design
the trigger at the right moment when someone is ready and
able to take the action. A lot of the design challenge in applying these kinds of techniques, whether it's in
software or in other situations, is building in the
right kind of triggers to work at the right
moment. Too many triggers will just overwhelm
people. They'll become noise. And, finally Fogg says there are three
kinds of triggers. The first one he calls sparks, and these are triggers that increase your
motivation. They're things that make you more likely
to want to do something. The second are facilitators triggers that
increase your perceived ability. Things that make a task seem easier, even
if they don't make you more motivated they make it seem simpler and therefore that triggers you to take the
action. And finally triggers that are just
signals. If you're motivation and ability are
sufficiently high, so we're out here. All you need is just an alarm clock. You just need a reminder saying, okay,
time to go do that now, and that habit will be
activated. So, here's the punch line for
gamification. In my gamification design framework, there
were two kinds of activity loops. One I called the engagement loops, and the
other I called progression loops. Each one ties into one of these elements
of motivation in Fogg's model, and shows the way that gamification can activate
these various kinds of conditions to encourage
sustainable behavior change. The first one was the engagement loop. And this you may recall was the move from
a motivation to an action to feedback, and back again to
motivation. This was what sometimes gets called the
addiction loop. It's the thing that creates that pull that
you want to do something. Even if it's something that objectively
you wouldn't think is something exciting, but you just feel that
desire to do it. Or it's more, robustly, your reaction to
feedback that's then giving you a sense that this is something
that you should want to do something. That ties in directly with motivation. So engagement loops are great techniques
for pushing up on that motivation axis, making people more
motivated to do something. The second kind of loop is the progression
loop, and, this was the, stair step up the mountain with the various stops and
boss fights and so forth along the way. And this is basically about perceived
ability because down here at the bottom, where we have on-boarding,
this kind of progression structure in games makes people feel
comfortable with the game. And then, as you move along to various
spots, you go up a ramp of difficulty, and then achieve a
level of mastery, and then level out. So, again, it navigates you through the
process of getting better and better, and improving both your actual ability and
your perception of your ability. Wow, now I'm up here and I was able to
kill this really big boss, which when I was down here
starting off, I thought was impossible. So that ties into the notion of perceived
ability and pushing along that access of behavior
change using gamification. And finally, triggers. If you look at well designed games,
they're great at triggering. They're great at putting something in
front of you at the right moment. And that's what in gamification analytics
can do. Understanding behavior, understanding how
people react to the system and what they're doing provides
guidance for giving them the right trigger at the right moment to encourage them to
participate further. If you're interested in more on this
topic, Michael Wu, who is the principle scientist for
analytics at a company called Lithium, has a terrific
series of blog posts explaining some of the basic
concepts around gamification. And, here's the one that talks
specifically about the application of the Fogg behavior
model.