# 4.3 The PBL Triad

All game elements are equal but some are
more equal than others. Actually no, that's not true. But there are some game elements that are
more common than others and that are more influential in others in
shaping typical examples of gamification. And there's three of them I'd like to
highlight for you and go into more detail on, which are
represented by the acronym PBL. And these are the following, points, badges, and leaderboards. P-B-L. When I taught the first business school course on gamification,with my
colleague Dan Hunter last year. We challenged our teams of MBAs to come up with novel implementations of
gamification. And yet virtually every one of them used
PBLs as at least one of the core elements of their
gamification designs. There's just a fundamental attraction to
using these elements in gamification and part of
that is because they serve a variety of different functions, more so than one
might expect. So, most of the common examples. At least the standard kinds of examples of
gamification like Samsung Nation which I've already mentioned to you
have PBLs at their core. Shouldn't be too hard for you to see them
on the screenshot here. But lets look at each of these elements in
detail. And try to understand what functions they
serve. Because it turns out that one of the
reasons why PBLs are useful is that they do a number of
different things. But it's important to realize that as useful as PBLs are, they are not
everything. And gamification should not start and end
with just these three elements. Or it will easily become boring and
shallow. Alright, so let's start with points. What is the point of points? Well, the first thing you might think of,
is that points are a way of keeping score. So, if we know that someone has 100
points, and someone else has 5000 points, then we know that this
player here is the winner. Points are our way of determining how well
someone is doing in the game. So points can either show the relative
position of players or they can actually define
winning. Winning might be the first person to
achieve 5,000 points. But they do other things as well. Points can connect up with rewards. So you need say, 5,000 virtual points to
get some reward, whether that's a free hotel stay or some
badge in a gamified system. Points also provide feedback. Seeing here that you've got 5,000 points
in this case is pretty good evidence that you're doing better than you when you had
a 100 or this other player who has a 100. The points are a feedback mechanism. They show you in real time exactly how
you're doing in the game. The points also are a way of displaying
progress. So you remember I talked about the
importance of the progress dynamic of getting up to a
higher point. The points give you feedback but they also
are a way of telling that you're moving along that
staircase and where you are. The points also provide data. So the game designer can see how many
points you're earning, where you're earning them,
how fast you're earning them and so forth, and that can be used to enhance the game or the gamified
system. And finally the great thing about points
is that a point is a point is a point is a point is a
point. They're all equal. So as long as you have one point system
you could conceivably have games and gamified systems with multiple independent point systems that
aren't tradeable. But generally speaking, one point is as
good as another. Which means that points can be used to
represent anything. They're a universal currency if you will,
that allows us to create a system where doing one sort of action,
going off on a quest with your friends, is somehow
equivalent or comparable to doing some other sort of action, sitting and watching
a video on the site. So points do all of those sorts of things, all of which can be valuable in
gamification. Next up, badges. Badges are representations of achievement. So they are some visual indication that
you have reached a certain level or you've accomplished some set of objectives that
was set for you in the gameified system. The point is that there are something,
typically a button-like, graphic that goes on a
profile page or some place that other players can see, and
they show and represent and encapsulate the
achievement of that player. Now there are many great things about
badges. They are often associated with Four Square
although a great many gamified services now use badges in
various different ways. One of the powerful things about badges is
just how flexible they are. So you can represent anything in a badge. The badge is just this little shield or
button or whatever, that is an open canvas for the game designer to reward or
commemorate what ever they want. So maybe you get a badge for the first
time that you do something. Maybe you get a badge for doing something
100 times in a row. Maybe you get a badge just at random
because the game designer wanted to give you a little
surprise that morning. The badge can represent what ever the game
designer wants and that's very powerful. Because the gamified system is trying to
motivate certain behavior. It's trying to result in certain outcomes
that are relevant to the business or the other
context. So the badge can be a great way of
conveying that by linking to exactly what it is that the
gamification designer wants to motivate. Badges also can convey style. Now this badge you see here, if you can
even think of that as a badge, does not convey a whole
lot of style. It conveys the fact that I'm not very good
at drawing. But the point here is because badges are
graphical, they can have their own kind of graphical style
and the design elements, the pattern of those
badges, can represent and communicate the vibe, or the overall
aesthetic of the gamified system. They also signal importance. So, a badge designates what things are
significant in the game. There are many kinds of things that might
be achievements or points or levels, but the
badge says, yes, this is something this game or this
gamified service will reward and that tells you potentially
that it's significant. They also function as credentials. The badge tells anyone who's looking
here's what I've done. I have gotten all the way through Professor Warbeck's course error corse on
gamification. And I see some badge that shows everyone
that I've done that. That's a credential like the good
housekeeping seal, or the diploma that you get if you graduate from
a college. Badges also can support collections. So if you have a bookcase if you will,
that can hold a variety of different badges, then that's often seen by players
as an invitation to fill it up. And players want to have the full cupboard
and they want to collect things from many different
places that fit into that cupboard. That then becomes, in and of itself, a
structure, a mechanic that pushes people along to play the game more and to
feel more engaged in it. And finally badges are status symbols. They show ah-hah, I have accomplished
this. I have this really cool badge that no one
else has. Now badges don't have to be that. Status is a complicated and dangerous thing in gamification that we'll talk
about. But certainly if the gamified system is
going to depend on status, then badges are typically going to be some part
of how it does so. There are number of initiatives that
involve using badges not just in game verification but more
broadly in particular for this credentialing
function, one of the most significant is the open badge framework
from the Mozilla foundation. Here's the url so you can find out more. Here's, a, a graphic which comes from
Wikipedia showing the process. The challenge here that the Mozilla
Foundation is taking on is informal learning or other kinds of
learning that don't fit into the traditional
mechanisms of things like college where you get the badge of
the diploma. So if you've taken a whole bunch of online
courses, or if you have more informally participated in some online activities that are tantamount
in the kind of skill development you would
get in a course, how do you show employers, potential colleagues, anyone
who's curious, that you've done that. How do you represent that skill? How do you credential what you've done? Given that the badge that you get within
any particular system is typically only designed for use
within that system. So the open badge framework is a software
platform that allows any kind of badge issuer, which could be universities
or training programs or informal programs to
then issue badges to the learner, and then the
learner has the opportunity to take those badges in a secure way and put them into
what they call a badge backpack. Some collection of all of that users
badges which then itself can be pushed out to social media and job
sites and so forth. This is an integrated system for using
badges effectively as credentials. Which is catalyzing a lot of activity in
various kinds of online learning, especially outside of our
traditional formal higher educational and K-12
educational learning. It's canalizing a lot of activity to use
these badges as ways of encouraging and memorializing
effective learning that occurs. Finally Leaderboards, Leaderboards are
about ranking, they tell you exactly where you stand relative to other people
who play the game. Another way to think about them is as a
form of feedback as are all these elements that we're talking
about here, but this feedback is specifically on
competition. How well you're doing relative to others
who play the game, and leaderboards are fairly ubiquitous in
video games and arcade games of all kinds. But there's a danger with leaderboards,
and a challenge which is that if you see your score, and let's say your score in the
game is 555, and then you look at the leaderboard, and the leaderboard tells you
that the person on the top of the leaderboard has
127,000,000 you're going to look at that and say,
whoa, it's a long way from here to there. And you're not going to feel as good or confident about your score, and you're
also potentially going to feel like there's no
way I'm going to get good at this game. I'm never going to get 100 million points,
and it tends to make it more common for people to abandon the
game, for people to not find it fun. So what a number of social games have done
is an innovation on the leader board. Is what we can call the personalized
leaderboard. So now you have have your 555 score here,
but instead of seeing that relative to all players of the game, you see it
appear in the middle of the leaderboard. That's you, and then you see immediately
of, above you, here is someone with 980, here's
someone with 400. Here's someone with with 325 and so forth. Your score now looks like it's in the
middle. You're zooming directly on your score as
opposed to seeing the fact that there's someone way, way, way above you
who has a much better score. A variant on that is what I'll call friend relative leader boards where the
only things that you see on this personalized
leaderboards are your friends, people who are in your
social graph. So now you are comparing yourself not just to strangers, but specifically
comparing yourself to people you know, which is encouraging
to you to want to compete against them. So that's some of the innovation that
we're seeing in leaderboards in social games, which also
could be applied to gamification. But there's some real dangers to the
leaderboards. And in fact with all of these elements as
I'll talk about in the next segment. Leaderboards in many contexts have been
shown in studies to demotivate. Leaderboards are commonly used in things
like sales contests. If you sell the most in this week you get
some award and will show as the contest is going on
who's at the top. And the idea companies use that for is
that will really push people. You'll see that someone's ahead of you and
you'll double down, or you'll see that you're just a little bit
behind and you'll work harder. And that may be so, but in many cases researchers have found that seeing
things in those leaderboard terms, zero sum game, it's all
about competition, actually will make people
less willing to engage. They will just give up or not try as hard
because the leaderboard focuses them too squarely on that kind of zero-sum competitive
challenge. So in the next segment I'll talk in more
detail about some of the limitations and problems with designing
with game elements in general, and in particular
these PBLs.