# 4.1 Breaking Games Down

In this unit, I'm going to talk about
designing using game elements. Now that you've oriented yourself to think
like a game designer, how do you practically take things out of games
and apply them to business practices? As I mentioned in the introductory unit, game elements are your tool box for
gamification. So, think about it, if you're trying to
build a house, you wouldn't go out to the hardware store and ask to buy a house gun that somehow shot out completely
formed houses. No, what you do is you buy things like
hammers, and nails and screwdrivers, and two by
fours and sheet rock. All the different components that you can
put together in different ways to make up a
house. To make up any kind of house or any kind
of building that you want, by recombining
those elements in different ways. So, that's what we mean when we talk about
game elements. They are regular patterns. They are tools that we can extract from
games that we find in the wild, and then use in different ways to make
business practices more game like. So, you'll recall I gave the example
earlier on of Empires & Allies, the Zynga game where I showed you the game, and then show you some of the different kinds of
elements. Things like the points, and the quests,
and the levels and so forth. This is a template for what game elements
might look like, but let's step back and talk
about what game elements are initially, and then
we'll build up a list of common game elements that are used
in gamification. So, let me draw for you here something that will probably be familiar to most of
you. [BLANK_AUDIO] Starting to look familiar? How about this? [BLANK_AUDIO] Okay, by now, you probably are recognizing
that what I've drawn is the game Tic Tac Toe or, in the Commonwealth world,
it's known as Knots and Crosses. One of the most popular games of all time
played for many centuries. It's a game that many of us are familiar
with. But, what if you think about this game,
Tic Tac Toe, not through the lens of the game itself, not through
the lens of the game play. Here I am playing, aha, I forked. And now this guy's going to win, but think
about it through the lens of elements. What are the elements of Tic Tac Toe? What are the regular patterns, the pieces
of this game that come together along with the aesthetics and the overall
experience to generate the gameplay? Stop and see if you can think about some
of the different element that make up the game that we call
Tic Tac Toe. There's no one universal list, but you can
probably come up with some of them that are fairly easy
to spot. Here's a list of elements in Tic Tac Toe
that I made. There is, of course, the game board, that
pattern of lines that create nine spots that you can
play in. And there are the tokens, as I call them,
the X and the O that you play with. There are also, there is also the fact
that Tic Tac Toe is a game played with two
players. Now that's not anywhere there on the
board, it's part of the rules of the game and it's part of the
structures of the game. The rules are things like you play an X
and then the next player plays an O. You can only play in one square and so
forth. I'm talking about things that structure
the game that go to the essence of what makes it engaging
or not. So one of them is Tic Tac Toe is a game
played between two players, who are competitive,
i.e, one person wins, one person loses. It's not a bunch of people who are
collaborating together to find a solution, it's one winner and one loser in every
game, or the game's a draw. They take turns. That's part of the structure of the game. One player goes and then the other goes,
and the game defines certain situations, where we
say one player wins. So, if in fact, I'm able to make three X's
in a row here, I have won the game. That is called a win state. Similarly, if we get to a point where all
the boxes are filled up, and no one has three in a row,
that's a draw. And if you saw the movie War Games, the computer figured out somehow, in his
vast intelligence, that any two decently competent Tic Tac
Toe players can generate a draw in every
single game. No way to win the game. Now, in that movie, that result almost led
to nuclear war, we don't have to worry about that but the point that I want to
make here is that the structure of the game, the elements of what it takes to win
and what it takes to draw, the game contribute to the gameplay, and
contribute to the way people feel in playing Tic Tac
Toe. How much fun it is, how much people want to keep playing, how interesting it
seems and so forth, and all of this feeds into gamification when we think about deploying
these tools systematically. There's no one set of elements that's
always good or always bad, they have to be understood in context
of the overall game. So a few others, there's no progression. Now this is a limitation on Tic Tac Toe. It doesn't necessarily get better or
change, as you play it. There's no level one Tic Tac Toe, and then
once you finish this board here, you go on to
level two. Nor is there any kind of scoring, unless
you just keep track of who wins each game. It's just, you play the game and you win
or you lose. These are also elements about why, when
you think about it, Tic Tac Toe's a pretty bad game. Incredibly popular for centuries of human
history, and yet, a game that is so simplistic, and so easy to draw, that it's not going to
hold any adults interested for very long. And again, you can see that from the
elements that are there and some of the elements that are missing, the
ability to progress and advance in the game and the ability to get feedback from
scoring, certainly not necessary as I've said, but things that tend to produce more
engaging games, than games with out them. So another way to think about this is, if we talk about the game here in the middle,
and we can think about that through the
various definitions that I gave you, at the top is the
experience. The overall impact of the game, what you
feel like when you play the game, that's the
experience. First point here is that, this here, the
game, and this here the experience, are not the
same thing. The game is the set of rules, the
aesthetics, all of the game elements, the experience is what the
player feels when they're playing it. Those two are very much related but
they're different things, and when you're doing
game design, what you control is the game, and what you try to produce is a certain kind of
experience. The other side to this is what's down
here, which are the elements. So if the experience is the kind of
gestalt, the overall impact or feeling of the game, the
elements are the piece parts, the bits and pieces, if you
build up the game from smaller units, then you're
building up from elements. If you think of the game in terms of its
general impact, how fun it feels,and why it feels fun,
you're talking about the experience. And really, both of these are ways to
think about gamification. We're going to focus mostly on going up
from the elements, but gamification is also about, again, thinking like a game
designer, and trying to understand how overall experiences that we can
understand from games, can be put into non-game contexts, using things like
elements but also using other kinds of techniques.