# 9.4 Playbor

An important question that arises
in enterprise gamification is whether the game is truly voluntary. And one way to describe
that is the word playbor which is the combination of play and
labor. If it's both play and
work at the same time, what is it? Is it a game? Well, under the definition of
games that I gave you, it's not. A game has to be voluntary. That's at the essence of what makes up a
game like the fact that you choose to play and you choose to take the rules
of the game seriously. If someone says go play
this game right now, then you don't necessarily have a choice. If you're forced to do it,
you may be going through the same motions. If, let's say, you're an actor hired
to play a game of soccer in a movie, you're not playing soccer when
you're acting out your role. You're acting out your role. So, what about someone who is
forced to play a game at work or more commonly is forced to engage
in some gamified activity at work? What if they don't have agency and choice over the matter but
their employer puts into place a gamified system to incentivize them
to work harder and be more productive. What about, for example, these check out
cashiers at target who have the screen here that you see in front of you when
they are checking people out at the store. The screen has a system
that gives you either green, red or yellow,
based on how fast you check someone out. So this person that just got checked out,
they got a G. They did well, they did that fast enough. You see your last ten scores,
you see your total scores. This person has 88% G,
and other information. Now, you can look at that and say, great, that's incentivizing those target
check out clerks to do a better job. It's making it a little bit more fun for
them. It's giving them some
extra added incentive to do a better performance on their tasks. Or you could look at it and
say, wait a minute. First of all,
this is not about the cashiers at all. It's about the company monitoring them down to the level of every
individual check out. So it's this kind of private Big Brother
looking over your shoulder constantly, every second as you're at work. And secondly, it's not at all about fun or
about voluntariness or about meaning or
anything for the employee. It's purely about external
extrinsic controls. It's purely about we will
reward you if you do well, or maybe even more so, we will
punish you if you don't do as well. And where's the game aspects in that? So there's a real question here, at the conceptual level about
whether these are gamification, but more importantly, at the practical level,
are these a good idea. And are these mandatory
systems truly fair and appropriate and ethical for the workers. Here's another example to take a look at. This is an article from
the Los Angeles Times. If you want to read the actual article,
you can get it here. It's a story about a group
of laundry workers and housekeeping staff at
hotels at Disneyland. And Disney has put into place,
at these hotels, a leaderboard system. So, as they are doing the laundry
in the basement of the hotel, they see how quickly every member of
the housekeeping staff is cleaning rooms, and performing their
other assigned duties. And there's a leaderboard and
a ranking that shows them in that way. And the employees have a name for
this system. They don't call it a game. They don't call it a leaderboard. They call it the electronic whip. [SOUND] It's something that they
perceive as standing over them, threatening them with punishment and
goading them on to work harder. Here's a couple of quotes from the story
to get you thinking about whether this is the kind of practice that
should be encouraged. Or if potentially,
it's the kind of practice that necessarily will follow as gamification
takes hold in the enterprise. Here's a quote from one of
the workers saying, I was nervous and felt I was being controlled even more. So this ties in very directly to
what I talked about with regard to self-determination theory. Part of what makes something intrinsically
motivating is when the person feels autonomy. They feel like they are in
control of the situation. If the feedback that they get
doesn't promote that autonomy. If it's not purely informational,
but it's perceived as controlling. It's feedback saying we are using
this to tell you what to do and to make you do what we want. Then it does not promote
intrinsic motivation and then actually it can demotivate. It can lead to worse performance. Here's a couple of more quotes. What were the effects of this electronic
whip system according to the workers? Well, it led to a sort of competition,
great, competition. The workers see the leaderboard, and without being told anything more,
they figure out that this is a game and they try to play the game and
try to score high. And some of the workers try to
race to the head of the pack. So, you might think, okay, great,
this is working the way it should. But, here is the kicker. That led to dissension and
made other employees worry that a reasonable pace wouldn't
be enough to keep the boss happy. Is that really what we want? Is that really even in
the interest of the company in terms of promoting a successful and
effective workforce? And final quote here. According to some of the workers,
employees have been known to skip bathroom breaks out of fear that
their production will fall and managers will demand an explanation. All of this just from a leaderboard. So it's important to think about,
first of all, how can gamified systems in the enterprise be designed to promote
the beneficial aspects of gamification. But not lead to this kind
of Lord of the Flies, all-against-all competition
that demoralizes workers. And likely, based on the research
about intrinsic motivation, likely will lead to worse
performance than they had before. How do companies avoid that and still get the benefits that we've talked
about from gamification in the enterprise? One aspect is the extent to which
the system is voluntary and is perceived as voluntary by the workers,
and is perceived as transparent. What is this doing? Is this actually tracking me for something that will be used in
assessing my job performance? Or is this just informational to help
encourage me to do a better job? And what are the elements of the gamified
system that are being employed? As we've talked about a pure leaderboard. A pure ranking and scoring system
is probably the worst way to promote the beneficial cooperative
engaging aspects of gamification. And instead promote the more vicious and harmful kinds of
gamification among workers. Beyond that, I leave it to you
to think about this question but it's an important one for
any company to take in to account when going down the path of putting
game like systems into their workplace.